Chapter 1:
Rationale
1.1
General introduction
Urban solid waste management is considered one of the most immediate and serious environ-
mental problems confronting urban governments in low- and middle-income countries. The sever-
ity of this challenge will increase in the future given the trends of rapid urbanisation and growth
in urban population. Due to growing public pressure and environmental concerns, waste experts
worldwide are being called upon to develop more sustainable methods of dealing with municipal
waste that embrace the concept of a circular economy.
Recycling organic waste material (biowaste) is still fairly limited, especially in low- and middle-in-
come settingsthough this is by far the largest fraction of all generated municipal waste. This
book deals with urban organic municipal waste from households, commercial activities, and insti-
tutions. It describes the conversion of biowaste by insect larvae, using the example of the Black
Soldier Fly (BSF), Hermetia illucens, an approach that has obtained much attention in the past
decade. The feeding activity of the larvae drastically reduces the amount of waste while the har-
vested larvae can be used as valuable raw materials in the animal feed industry. This technology
has received attention in recent years due to the business opportunities it offers, which simultane-
ously address several challenges of modern society: hygiene issues arising from the lack of waste
management, unemployment in urban areas, and an increased demand for sustainable feed for
the ever-growing aquaculture and aviculture sector. Enterprises and small entrepreneurs are al-
ready investing significant amounts of money and time into this technology and are interested in
keeping a competitive edge on the practical aspects of operating such a facility in a cost-effective
way. Although academic publications on BSF are on the increase, the business interest and per-
ceived need to maintain a competitive edge has hindered open exchange about and discussion
of the practical day-to-day working steps required to operate such a facility. Filling this gap is the
main objective of this publication.
This document is based largely on the experience of a treatment facility in Indonesia with the
capacity to treat two tons of waste per day that has been in operation for over five years and the
insights from an experimental facility in Sweden. Waste processed at the facility in Indonesia was
mostly fruit and vegetable waste from a wholesale market. Upscaling or transferring this informa-
tion to a larger facility might require some adaptation or adjustment of equipment. It is, however,
our opinion that the standard procedures described are valid for a large range of scaling-up.
Two research projects provided the basis for the writing of the second edition of these guidelines.
FORWARD is a project located in Indonesia funded by the Swiss State Secretariat for Economic
Affairs (SECO), under a framework agreement with the Indonesian Ministry of Public Works &
Housing (PU-PeRa). It works in close collaboration with national and local governmental author-
ities, with Indonesian researchers and with selected private enterprises to advance and main-
stream implementation of BSF waste processing. SIBRE is a research project funded by SwissRe
Foundation with the objective to generate knowledge and tools around BSF waste processing for
use by small and medium enterprises and municipalities. Its focus was set predominantly on the
economic perspectives and developing standard protocols for products derived from BSF larvae
and testing these in the Indonesia context. In addition, this second edition benefited significantly
from the close collaboration with ETH-Zürich and the Department of Health Sciences and Tech-
nology through the research group of Prof. A. Mathys on Sustainable Food Processing with whom
we collaborate on a variety of research projects on BSF waste processing.
This manual was written as open source with the ambition that BSF waste processing would
obtain widespread notice, implementation and replication. In this spirit, the authors would like
Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing
1to acknowledge all those that helped to develop, document and discuss the practical aspects of
BSF rearing and waste treatment by larvae. Particular thanks go to Sirajuddin Kurniawan, whose
pictures of the equipment and work steps saved us many pages of explanatory text, Bart Verstap-
pen for his contribution to the first edition of this book, Maximillian Grau and Grégoire Virard for
their intense work on the cost modelling, Alexander Mathys, Moritz Gold and Daniela Peguero of
ETH-Zürich for our most inspiring and fruitful research collaboration, Cecilia Lalander and Björn
Vinnerås of the Swedish Agricultural University SLU (Sweden) for an excellent research partner-
ship, Tina Kusumawardhani and Teguh Rahayu for translating this book into Bahasa Indonesia and
all their help in developing the rearing system, Longyu Zheng and Jibin Zhang of the Huazhong
Agricultural University (China) and Michael Wu of JM Green (China) for their openness and their
fruitful input, and finally also Waste 4 Change and Puspa Agro for their partnership and willingness
to manage and host the BSF facility.
1.2
Scope and target audience
An engineered BSF processing facility can be designed and operated to achieve certain target
objectives based on the natural life cycle of BSF. These, for instance, can be to cost effectively
augment larvae quality or maximize the larval mass produced within a certain time frame or based
on a particular feedstock, similar to a typical livestock rearing system (chicken, beef, etc.).
In this manual, however, we follow a waste management perspective. In other words, we start
from the premise that biowaste is the substance of concern for which we suggest to use the BSF
treatment technology as a suitable processing and recycling solution to produce larvae and waste
residue.
The primary goal, therefore, is to process biowaste in an efficient way with regard to investment
and operational costs, as well as space requirements. By processing biowaste, threats to public
health and the environment can be reduced.
The technology solution consists of feeding segregated biowaste to BSF larvae, which have been
reared in a nursery. Larvae grow on the waste feedstock and reduce the waste mass. At the end
of the process, larvae are harvested and, if necessary, post-processed into a suitable animal feed
product. The waste residue can also be further processed and potentially sold or used as soil
amendment with fertilizing properties.
This guide has been prepared for practical use. It explains the required materials and equipment,
as well as each working step, similar to a cookbook with its respective recipes. It includes all
information required to develop and operate a medium-sized Black Soldier Fly larvae
waste processing facility, able to treat 5 tons of waste per day. The book also contains other
scenarios of scale in which the amount of work is less. Work plans and instructions for these
scenarios are available via web links.
It is worth mentioning that the approach presented in this handbook is one among many. It is
based on locally available equipment and limited automation. The operations presented here have
proven to work, but selected steps may individually be replaced with other procedures depending
on the given context or experience.
Given the approach of this handbook, it targets readers with little or only some basic knowledge
of waste management in general and Black Soldier Fly technology in particular, who have the will-
ingness to work with waste and to implement and operate such a facility. This guidance can also
be helpful to someone who has already started with BSF treatment and is interested in obtaining
other viewpoints on how things could be done.
2
Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing1.3
Navigating through this guide
The manual is structured according to the three main processing units that are key to a BSF process-
ing facility (Figure 1 –1).
1. BSF rearing unit
2. BSFL waste conversion unit (pre-processing, treatment, harvesting)
3. Post processing unit (larvae refining and residue processing)
BSF treatment
facility
Post-processing
Rearing
Residue refining
BSFL conversion
Waste sourcing
Pre-processing
Treatment
Product harvesting
Larvae refining
Product
marketing
Figure 1–1: The different units of a BSF treatment system
Although proper “waste sourcing” is of crucial importance to a well-functioning BSF facility, this
aspect is not discussed in detail in this manual.
Throughout the text, you will come across the following icons. They indicate issues of particular
importance, background information or access to further information material.
Highlights issues of high importance
Highlights detailed information for interested readers, but is not
required reading
Link to more detailed information, templates and factsheets
Link to the e-learning video series on BSF Biowaste Processing
Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing
3