his chapter takes a closer look at the life cycle of the Black Soldier Fly. Understanding the life
cycle helps to know why BSF is a suitable insect for organic waste management and to learn how
this cycle can be “engineered” to enhance the benefits produced in terms of waste conversion
efficiency and product harvest in quantity and quality.
2.1 The Black Soldier Fly
The Black Soldier Fly, Hermetia illucens, is of the dipteran family Stratiomyidae. It can be encoun-
tered in nature worldwide in the tropical and sub-tropical areas between the latitudes of 40°S and
45°N (Figure 2–1).
The egg starts a BSF life cycle and at the same time marks the end of the previous life stage: a
fly laying a cluster of eggs (also called ovipositing). The female fly lays a package of 400 to 800
eggs close to decomposing organic matter, into small, dry, sheltered cavities. Shortly after having
laid the eggs, the female dies. The closeness of the eggs to the decomposing organic matter
ensures that the larvae have their first food source nearby after hatching. The sheltered cavities
protect the eggs from predators
and prevent dehydration of the
egg packages by direct sunlight.
On average, the eggs hatch after
four days and the emerged lar-
vae, which are barely visible, will
search for food and start feeding
on the organic material nearby.
The larvae feed voraciously on
45 ̊ N
40 ̊ S
Figure 2–1: Distribution area of the Black Soldier Fly, Hermetia illucens
Figure 2–2: Drawing of a Black Soldier Fly larva (Schremmer, 1986)
6 Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing
1a: Adult, top view 1b: Adult, side view 2: Females laying eggs
3: Larvae feeding 4: Prepupa 5: Pupae
Figure 2–3: Life stages of the Black Soldier Fly, Hermetia illucens, Photos: Nandayure Studt Solano (1a, 1b),
Samuel Blyth (2, 3, 4), Sandec (5)
the decomposing organic matter and grow from less than one millimeter to around 2.5 cm length
and 0.5 cm width, and are of cream-like colour. The different life stages are shown in Figure 2–2
and Figure 2–3.
Under optimal conditions with ideal food quality and quantity, the growth of the larvae will require
a period of 14 - 16 days. However, the BSF larva is a very resilient organism and has the ability to
extend its life cycle under unfavourable conditions. The larval stage is the only stage during which
the BSF feeds and, therefore, it is during this time of larval development that enough fat reserves
and protein are stored that allow the larvae to undergo pupation, emerge as flies, find mates, cop-
ulate and (as a female) lay eggs before dying.
After having gone through five larval stages, the larvae reach the final larval stage: the prepupa.
When transforming into a prepupa, the larva replaces its mouthpart with a hook-shaped structure
and becomes dark brown to charcoal grey in colour. It uses this hook to easily move out and away
from the food source towards a nearby dry, humus-like, shaded and protected environment that it
deems safe from predators and this is where the imago emerge from the pupa and fly off without
significant hindrance.
The process of pupation is the transformation from a pupa into a fly. The pupation stage is initiat-
ed when the prepupa finds a suitable location and becomes immobile and stiff. For a successful
pupation, it is best if the environmental conditions do not change too much or, in other words, that
they remain warm, shaded and protected from rain. Pupation takes around two to three weeks
and ends when the fly emerges from its pupa shell. The emerging process is a very short proce-
dure. It takes less than five minutes for the fly to break open the part of the pupa that used to be
the head section, crawl out, dry and then spread its wings and fly off.
After emerging, the fly lives for about one week. During this short life, it will search for a partner,
copulate and (for the female) lay eggs. As a fly, BSF do not feed. Only a source of water or a humid
surface is required to stay hydrated. What is important in this life stage is an abundant amount of
natural light and a warm temperature (25 - 32°C). A humid environment may prolong the life span
7Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing
Optimal environmental conditions and food sources for the larvae can be summarized as:
· Warm climate: the ideal temperature is between 24 and 30°C. If too hot, the larvae will crawl
away from the food in search of a cooler location. If too cold, the larvae will slow down their
metabolism, eat less and develop slower.
· Shaded environment: larvae avoid light and will always search for a shaded environment,
away from sunlight. If their food source is exposed to light, they will move deeper into the layer
of food to escape the light.
· Water content of the food: the food source has to be quite moist with a water content be-
tween 60% and 90% so that the larvae can ingest the substance. In the engineered life cycle
we aim at 70 - 80%.
· Nutrient requirements of the food: substrates rich in protein and easily available carbohy-
drates result in good larval growth. Ongoing research indicates that substrate may be more eas-
ily consumed by the larvae if it has already undergone some bacterial or fungal decomposition
process.
· Particle size of the food: as the larvae have no chewing mouthparts, access to nutrients is
easier if the substrate comes in small pieces or even as a slurry.
2.2 Why the Black Soldier Fly?
Several key attributes make BSF promising organisms to manage and “engineer” so that they
can be used as an attractive treatment technology for biowaste from the perspective of waste
managers and businesses:
· Waste biomass is converted into larvae and residue. The larvae consist of ±35% protein and
±30% crude fat (based on dry mass). This insect protein is of high quality and is an important
feed resource for animal feed. Feed trials have confirmed that it is a suitable alternative to fish
meal.
· Feeding waste to larvae has shown to inactivate disease transmitting bacteria, such as
Salmonella spp. This implies that the risk of disease transmission between animals and be-
tween animals and humans is reduced when using this technology at farm level or when
treating waste of animal origin in general (e.g. chicken manure or slaughterhouse waste). How-
ever, risk reduction is achieved mainly through material reduction (±80%) rather than through
pathogen inactivation.
· Waste reduction of up to 80 % on wet weight basis has been demonstrated. If BSF processing
is applied at or close to the source of biowaste generation, the costs for waste transport and
space requirements for landfills can, thus, be reduced drastically. Such organic waste treat-
ment could furthermore reduce open dumping, which is still an unfortunate reality in low- and
middle-income settings.
· The residue, a substance similar to compost, contains nutrients and organic matter and, when
used in agriculture, helps to improve soil conditions.
· A high waste-to-biomass conversion rate of 15 - 20% on wet weight basis has been demon-
strated, which is a satisfactory output quantity from a business perspective.
· There is no need for sophisticated high-end technology to operate such a facility. Therefore, it
is suitable for low-income settings that rely mostly on simple technology and unskilled labour.
and, thus, enhance the chance for successful reproduction. It has been observed that the flies
prefer to copulate in the light of the morning. After copulation, the females then search for an ideal
location to lay their eggs as explained above.
8 Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing
2.3 Engineering the BSF life cycle
In an engineered BSF processing facility, we can differentiate distinct processing units as shown
in Figure 2–4.
Figure 2–4: Units of a BSF treatment facility
BSF rearing unit
This ensures that a reliable and consistent amount of small larvae (called 5-DOL) is al-
ways available to inoculate the daily amount of biowaste that is received for processing
at the treatment facility. A certain number of larvae hatchlings are, however, kept in
the rearing unit to grow and pupate, to ensure a stable breeding population.
BSFL conversion unit
It is critical that the waste received at the facility is suitable for feeding to the larvae.
A first step involves a control of the waste to ensure it contains no hazardous materials
and no inorganic substances. Further steps then involve a reduction of the waste parti-
cle size and a blending of different organic waste types to create a suitable balanced diet
and moisture content (70 - 80%) for the larvae. Then, 5-DOL from the rearing unit are fed
with biowaste in the “incubator” and/or “larvero” containers. The young larvae feed on
the substrate, grow into large larvae and, thus, process and reduce the waste. Shortly
before turning into pre-pupae, the larvae are harvested from the larveros. The residue
itself is also a product of value.
Post-processing unit
Both products, larvae and residue, can be further processed. We call this “post-process-
ing”. Typically, a first step is to kill the larvae. Other steps of larvae refinement include
drying the larvae, and separating dried larvae into larvae oil from larvae protein meal.
A typical step for residue refinement is composting or feeding the residue into a biogas
digester for fuel production.
BSF treatment
facility Rearing
BSFL conversion
Pre-processing Treatment Product harvesting Larvae refining
Post-processing
Residue refining
9Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing
2.4 Safety and hygiene measures when working with BSF and biowaste
During operation of a BSF facility, measures that protect the health of the workers as well as the
animals are also a necessity.
Although operation of a BSF facility does not entail high hazards to health, employees are never-
theless exposed to threats such as noise, dust or gaseous emissions as well as exposed to patho-
gens that may enter the facility through the organic waste. It is therefore important that adequate
protective clothing and equipment is always available for the workers. Even if wearing of boots or
gloves will meet with little enthusiasm among the employees, especially in a tropical climate, it is
the responsibility of the operator to enforce such measures and to set a good example.
As in other livestock farms, care must be taken to maintain hygienic conditions in a BSF facility.
The main focus is to prevent the spread of diseases and keeping pests away. For this reason,
regular activities that guarantee hygienic conditions must be included in the work plans. This
includes the regular cleaning of work surfaces with alcohol as well as the safe storage of animal
feed or structural measures that prevent rats or birds from entering sensitive areas of the facility.
Maintaining general order in all areas of the facility and daily cleaning of utensils should be stand-
ard practice. The facility should also have its own waste concept, which ensures that potentially
contaminated materials are stored and disposed of safely.
The schedules used in this manual all include regular tasks to maintain hygiene and safety in the
facility. We recommend that operators place as much emphasis on the carrying out of these tasks
as they do on those directly related to BSF operation.
The following equipment is part of the standard personal protective and cleaning equipment at
any BSF facility:
FacemaskBroom and dustpan Work coat Latex-/Lab gloves
Face shieldRubber boots Rubber gloves Heat resistant gloves