Sandec: Department of
Sanitation, Water and Solid
Waste for Development
Black Soldier Fly
Biowaste Processing
A Step-by-Step Guide – 2 nd Edition
Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing
1Impressum
Publisher: Eawag – Swiss Federal Institute of Aquatic Science
and Technology
Department of Sanitation, Water and Solid Waste for
Development (Sandec)
Überlandstrasse 133, 8600 Dübendorf, Switzerland
Phone +41 58 765 52 86
Cover picture: Sirajuddin Kurniawan
Photos: Eawag (unless stated otherwise)
Layout: Leanza Mediaproduktion GmbH
Figures: Stefan Diener, Eawag
Review: Moritz Gold
Published: 2021
Circulation: 200 copies printed on original recycled paper
ISBN: 978-3-906484-75-4
Bibliographic reference: Dortmans B.M.A., Egger J., Diener S., Zurbrügg C. (2021)
Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing - A Step-by-Step Guide,
2 nd Edition
Eawag: Swiss Federal Institute of Aquatic Science and
Technology, Dübendorf, Switzerland
The content of this document is licensed under a Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International license4
Black Soldier Fly Biowaste ProcessingBlack Soldier Fly Biowaste
Processing
A Step-by-Step Guide –– 2 nd Edition
Bram Dortmans
Julia Egger
Stefan Diener
Christian Zurbrügg
Written and published with financial support from the Swiss State Secretariat for Economic
Affairs (SECO) and the Swiss Re Foundation
Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing
I6
Black Soldier Fly Biowaste ProcessingTable of contents:
Glossary
Chapter 1:
Chapter 2:
Chapter 3:
Chapter 4:
Chapter 5:
Chapter 6:
IV
Rationale 1
1.1 General introduction
1.2 Scope and target audience
1.3 Navigating through this guide 1
2
3
Introduction into BSF biowaste processing 5
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4 5
7
8
9
The Black Soldier Fly
Why the Black Soldier Fly?
Engineering the BSF life cycle
Safety and hygiene measures when working with BSF and biowaste
The BSF rearing process 11
3.1 Rearing BSF in a controlled environment
3.2 Activities in the BSF rearing unit
3.3 Work scheduling and data management 11
16
36
BSFL conversion operations 39
4.1 Sourcing biowaste
4.2 Activities in the BSFL conversion unit
4.3 Work schedules, monitoring and data collection 39
45
59
BSFL post-processing and marketing 61
5.1 Marketable products from BSFL biowaste conversion
5.2 Activities in the post-processing unit
5.3 Monitoring, storage and product labelling 61
67
84
Business development 87
6.1
6.2
6.3
6.4
6.5
6.6 87
88
90
90
91
92
Cost-revenue analysis and financial viability
The scenario-based business model tool
The web-based cost model tool
Siting a BSF waste processing facility
Creating a floorplan and planning the unit locations for a BSF site
Operational scenarios and work scheduling
Annexes
97
Annex A:
Annex B:
Annex C:
Annex D:
Annex E:
Annex F:
Annex G:
Annex H:
Annex I:
Work schedule for rearing unit
Feeding schedule for nursery larvero
Work schedule for conversion unit
Log sheet for productivity parameters in rearing unit
Log sheet for productivity parameters in treatment step of
conversion unit
Log sheet for productivity parameters in pre-processing and
harvesting stage of conversion unit
Log sheet for productivity parameters in post-processing unit
Technical drawings for custom-made materials and equipment
Material requirement list for three scenarios of operation in
a BSF biowaste processing facility
98
101
102
106
108
110
112
114
124
Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing IIIGlossary
5-DOL:
Abbreviation for Five-Day-Old-Larvae. Keeping the hatchlings in a controlled and
protected environment for five days after hatching increases the survival rate and
allows the larvae to be counted before they are added to the biowaste.
Adult:
The final development stage after pupation. With insects, this is usually called
“imago”.
Amino acids:
Amino acids are the building blocks of proteins and therefore determine their quality.
The amino acid profile of BSF meal is important to consider for feed formulations for
animals.
Anaerobic digestion:
Degradation of organic compounds by microorganisms in the absence of oxygen,
leading to the production of biogas.
Ant trap:
Protects from ant invasion. Each table leg is placed into a container filled with
water and a drop of detergent. The detergent reduces the surface tension of
the water.
Attractant:
Smelly liquid substance that attracts BSF females to lay eggs nearby. Usually, this
contains different smelly substances like fermenting fruit, dead flies or residue.
BSF eggs have also been found to act as an attractant. It is, therefore, advisable
not to harvest eggs every day as the already laid eggs attract other females.
Batch operation:
In batch operation, a defined amount of waste and larvae are added to a container,
which is harvested after a certain time. Batch operation is in contrast to
continuous operation, where waste and larvae are added continuously to the
same container. A continuous container is only emptied once it is full.
BCR:
Biomass Conversion Rate is the fraction of biowaste which is converted into
larval biomass.
Biowaste:
Generally, all biodegradable matter. In this particular context, it does not include
waste high in cellulose (e.g. garden waste, wood, grass clippings, leaves, etc.)
as this cannot be easily digested by the larvae.
Blanching:
Blanching describes the process of dipping the larvae shortly in boiling water and
subsequently washing them with clean and cold water.
BSF: Black Soldier Fly, Hermetia illucens
BSFL: The larvae of the Black Soldier Fly
Conditioning:
Preparation of the harvested BSFL for selling in live form or further post-
processing. Conditioning of the larvae is a requirement to increase product
purity and quality.
Cocopeat:
The powdery material resulting from processing coconut fibre. In this context,
it is mostly used for its moisture absorbing properties. It can be replaced by
other materials with similar moisture absorbing properties, such as wheat bran,
for example.
Compost:
Organic matter that has been degraded and transformed by aerobic processes
to a soil-like substance and can be used as a fertilizer and soil amendment.
Crude oil:
Fat fraction that results from pressing dried larvae with a screw press. It is called
“crude” because besides the fat also contains solids, which mainly consist of
proteins and fibres.
Dark cage:
Adult flies emerge in the dark cage where they remain until transferred to the
love cage. The darkness keeps the flies calm and prevents mating activity.
IV Black Soldier Fly Biowaste ProcessingDate code:
The date code allows for calculating the duration of the ongoing process and is
applied to cages and containers. It consists of the calendar week of the year and
the day of the week (for example: Tuesday of week 8 is coded as 8.2).
Decanting:
Process to purify BSF crude oil. Gradual pouring of separated BSF oil from one
container into another without disturbing the settled solids.
Desiccant:
Dry matter:
A substance that is absorbing water and thereby sustains a state of dryness.
The mass of the matter after all water has been removed. It is usually
determined by keeping a sample in an oven at 105°C for at least 12 hours.
Egg:
A female fly lays around 500 eggs from which young larvae will hatch within
four days. One egg weighs about 29μg.
Eggie:
The media used in an engineered BSF-system to collect eggs. It provides
sheltered cavities for egg deposition.
Engineered biosystem: A biological process that has been optimised for a practical use.
Expiry date: A previously set date after which the product should no longer be used.
Fatty acids:
Major components of oil. The fatty acid composition determines the quality
and application of BSF oil.
Feeding station:
A designated area where waste is added to the larveros. It is advisable that it
can be cleaned easily (tiled or sealed floor) as biowaste may be spilled during
the feeding operation.
Fishmeal:
Fishmeal is a nutrient-rich feed ingredient used in the diets of farmed animals.
It is manufactured from wild-caught small marine fish and is a powder obtained
after grinding, cooking and defatting the fish. Fishmeal production is a significant
contributor to over-fishing.
Food and restaurant Biowaste from restaurants consists of kitchen scraps and food waste.
waste: It typically has a higher nutritional value and a lower water content than
market waste or food processing waste.
Food processing waste:
Biowaste from the food processing industry. It varies from fruit and vegetable
bits to bread crumbs and/or dairy products. It is usually a homogenous and
uniform waste source.
Fractioning:
Process in which BSFL are split into a protein fraction (BSF meal) and a fat
fraction (BSF oil).
Frass/Residue:
The leftovers after the treatment process. This substance can be a crumbly,
soil-like substrate or a wet slurry. It requires a subsequent composting step to
stabilize, before it can be used as solid amendment and/or fertilizer.
Hammer mill:
Crushes and shreds material into smaller pieces by repeated strikes of small
hammers. It does not cut material. The particle size is defined by the diameter
of the outlet screen.
Hatching: The process of young larvae (hatchlings) emerging from the egg.
Hatchling: Larvae that have just hatched from the eggs. Sometimes also called “neonates”.
Hatchling container: Hatchlings fall into the hatchling container after hatching where they remain and
feed for five days on nutritious feed (chicken feed) to become 5-DOL.
Hatchling shower:
Harvested eggies are placed on a rack called a hatchling shower, which is placed
over a hatchling container. When young larvae hatch, they fall into the hatchling
container, which is replaced regularly (every one to three days).
Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing
VIncubator unit:
Instar:
Container for first phase of BSFL conversion stage (from 5-DOL to 8-DOL).
A phase of larval growth. The BSFL pass through 5 instars before reaching the
final instar which is the pre-pupae stage.
Lab oven:
An oven which provides a uniform temperature. In BSF biowaste processing, it
is mostly used to obtain dry matter samples from waste, residue and larvae, and
operates at 105°C.
Larva:
The juvenile stadium of holometabolous insects. There are six larval stages,
so-called instars, in the life cycle of the Black Soldier Fly before metamorphosis
(transforming into an adult fly).
Larvero:
The larvero is the container where larvae feed on biowaste after being
transferred from the incubator unit. The larvae stay here from 8-DOL up to
17-DOL when they are harvested.
Love cage:
The love cage is a netted enclosure with a cohort of same-aged flies received
from the dark cages. In the love cage, adult flies mate and females lay their eggs
into eggies. After a week, the love cage is removed and emptied.
Low- and middle- Although BSF biowaste treatment can be applied all around the globe, the
income setting: set-up and operation presented in this book focuses on low- and middle-income
countries (GNI up to 10,000 EUR). This context is characterized by low labour
costs, and a high organic fraction of the municipal solid waste.
Market waste:
Consists mostly of fruits and vegetables. It has a high water content (up to 95%)
and is subject to seasonal variation. The outer parts of leafy vegetables may have
been exposed to pesticides.
Municipal organic
waste:
The organic fraction of waste generated by settlements, which includes hous
holds, commercial and industrial premises, institutions (schools, health care
centres, prisons, etc.) and public spaces (streets, bus stops, parks and gardens).
Net present value It is the difference between current amount of cash inflows and the current
(NPV): amount of cash outflows over a period of time. In this guide the NPV was
calculated over a period of five years
Nursery container:
In the nursery container, 5-DOL are fed a defined amount of nutritious feed
(e.g. wet chicken feed) until they transform into pre-pupae. They are transferred
to the pupation containers where the pre-pupae pupate and eventually emerge
as adults to maintain the colony.
Pop-larvae:
One type of dried BSFL, which have a puffed shape and a crispy texture.
Microwave drying or roasting results in pop-larvae.
Post-processing:
Includes all processes to convert sanitised larvae into products like dried BSFL,
BSF meal and BSF oil.
Poultry manure:
Manure from broiler production or layer hens. BSF larvae grow well on this rather
homogenous biowaste, but tend to remain quite small.
Pre-pupa:
The last larval stage that crawls out of the waste to search a dry pupation site.
In comparison to the larvae, pre-pupae have a higher chitin content and are,
therefore, less easy for fish and chicken to digest.
Press cake: Solid protein fraction after pressing BSFL using a screw press.
Press liquid: Liquid fat fraction after pressing BSFL using a screw press.
Pupa:
During pupation, the metamorphosis from larva to adult fly happens. Black Sol-
dier Fly larvae pupate within their last larval skin and pupation lasts around 20
days.
VI Black Soldier Fly Biowaste ProcessingPupation container:
The pupation container is filled with a moist pupation substrate (e.g. compost, moist coco
peat, pot soil, etc.) into which pre-pupae bury to pupate.
Purging:
Process to condition larvae before selling them alive. Larvae are washed with clean water
and then left in dry cocopeat for a few hours.
Rearing:
The rearing facility contains the whole life cycle of the Black Soldier Fly and produces the
5-DOL in sufficient numbers to treat the incoming biowaste.
Residue/Frass: See “Frass”.
Sanitising: Process to condition larvae before processing them into products. Larvae are killed rapidly
by dipping them in boiling water for 60 seconds and are then cleaned with cold and clean
water.
Shaking sieve:
A sieve which vibrates or shakes, that is powered by an eccentric drive. It is used with
two layer meshes of 3 and 7 mm in size during harvest to separate grown larvae from the
residue.
Shelf life: Is the length of time that a BSFL product may be used before its quality decreases.
Slaughterhouse waste: It includes bones, organs, hooves, blood and other inedible animal parts leftover after
all the edible parts of the animal have been removed. It can also include the gut content
of the slaughtered animals.
Spent grains:
The main waste product from beer production. The leftover malt and adjuncts after the
mash has extracted most of the sugars, proteins, and nutrients.
Substrate:
The material made up of various biowaste streams after pre-processing and conditioning
which is fed to the BSFL
Transfer container:
Collects the pre-pupae which crawl out of the nursery container. It contains cocopeat
or another dry substance to prevent the pre-pupae from escaping.
TS:
Total solids. It is the dry matter portion of a material. It normally relates to analysing
the water content of a material (see "Dry matter").
Ventilation frame:
Provides a space between the layers of larveros. It ensures the exchange of air and,
thus, the removal of moisture from the larveros
Waste reduction:
The waste reduction is measured, either based on wet weight or dry weight, and
compares the biowaste going into the treatment with the remaining biomass (residue).
Depending on the type of biowaste, one can expect a waste reduction between 60%
and 85% dry weight
Waste sourcing:
Proper waste sourcing is of crucial importance for a complete waste treatment chain.
It relies on a well-organised waste collection scheme that takes into account efficient
collection routes and adequate means of transport.
Water activity:
Is a measure for free water in a product that is available for microorganisms. Water
activity lower than 0.6 inhibits growth of any bacteria and yeasts.
Water content:
When a sample (substrate, larvae, residue, etc.) is dried at 105°C in a lab oven, all the
water that is evaporated is referred to as “water content”. Together with the remaining
solids (“total solids”), both are expressed as percentages of wet weight; it equals to 100%
Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing VII12 Black Soldier Fly Biowaste ProcessingChapter 1:
Rationale
1.1
General introduction
Urban solid waste management is considered one of the most immediate and serious environ-
mental problems confronting urban governments in low- and middle-income countries. The sever-
ity of this challenge will increase in the future given the trends of rapid urbanisation and growth
in urban population. Due to growing public pressure and environmental concerns, waste experts
worldwide are being called upon to develop more sustainable methods of dealing with municipal
waste that embrace the concept of a circular economy.
Recycling organic waste material (biowaste) is still fairly limited, especially in low- and middle-in-
come settings, although this is by far the largest fraction of all generated municipal waste. This
book deals with urban organic municipal waste from households, commercial activities, and insti-
tutions. It describes the conversion of biowaste by insect larvae, using the example of the Black
Soldier Fly (BSF), Hermetia illucens, an approach that has obtained much attention in the past
decade. The feeding activity of the larvae drastically reduces the amount of waste while the har-
vested larvae can be used as valuable raw materials in the animal feed industry. This technology
has received attention in recent years due to the business opportunities it offers, which simultane-
ously address several challenges of modern society: hygiene issues arising from the lack of waste
management, unemployment in urban areas, and an increased demand for sustainable feed for
the ever-growing aquaculture and aviculture sector. Enterprises and small entrepreneurs are al-
ready investing significant amounts of money and time into this technology and are interested in
keeping a competitive edge on the practical aspects of operating such a facility in a cost-effective
way. Although academic publications on BSF are on the increase, the business interest and per-
ceived need to maintain a competitive edge has hindered open exchange about and discussion
of the practical day-to-day working steps required to operate such a facility. Filling this gap is the
main objective of this publication.
This document is based largely on the experience of a treatment facility in Indonesia with the
capacity to treat two tons of waste per day that has been in operation for over five years and the
insights from an experimental facility in Sweden. Waste processed at the facility in Indonesia was
mostly fruit and vegetable waste from a wholesale market. Upscaling or transferring this informa-
tion to a larger facility might require some adaptation or adjustment of equipment. It is, however,
our opinion that the standard procedures described are valid for a large range of scaling-up.
Two research projects provided the basis for the writing of the second edition of these guidelines.
FORWARD is a project located in Indonesia funded by the Swiss State Secretariat for Economic
Affairs (SECO), under a framework agreement with the Indonesian Ministry of Public Works &
Housing (PU-PeRa). It works in close collaboration with national and local governmental author-
ities, with Indonesian researchers and with selected private enterprises to advance and main-
stream implementation of BSF waste processing. SIBRE is a research project funded by SwissRe
Foundation with the objective to generate knowledge and tools around BSF waste processing for
use by small and medium enterprises and municipalities. Its focus was set predominantly on the
economic perspectives and developing standard protocols for products derived from BSF larvae
and testing these in the Indonesia context. In addition, this second edition benefited significantly
from the close collaboration with ETH-Zürich and the Department of Health Sciences and Tech-
nology through the research group of Prof. A. Mathys on Sustainable Food Processing with whom
we collaborate on a variety of research projects on BSF waste processing.
This manual was written as open source with the ambition that BSF waste processing would
obtain widespread notice, implementation and replication. In this spirit, the authors would like
Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing
1to acknowledge all those that helped to develop, document and discuss the practical aspects of
BSF rearing and waste treatment by larvae. Particular thanks go to Sirajuddin Kurniawan, whose
pictures of the equipment and work steps saved us many pages of explanatory text, Bart Verstap-
pen for his contribution to the first edition of this book, Maximillian Grau and Grégoire Virard for
their intense work on the cost modelling, Alexander Mathys, Moritz Gold and Daniela Peguero of
ETH-Zürich for our most inspiring and fruitful research collaboration, Cecilia Lalander and Björn
Vinnerås of the Swedish Agricultural University SLU (Sweden) for an excellent research partner-
ship, Tina Kusumawardhani and Teguh Rahayu for translating this book into Bahasa Indonesia and
all their help in developing the rearing system, Longyu Zheng and Jibin Zhang of the Huazhong
Agricultural University (China) and Michael Wu of JM Green (China) for their openness and their
fruitful input, and finally also Waste 4 Change and Puspa Agro for their partnership and willingness
to manage and host the BSF facility.
1.2
Scope and target audience
An engineered BSF processing facility can be designed and operated to achieve certain target
objectives based on the natural life cycle of BSF. These, for instance, can be to cost effectively
augment larvae quality or maximize the larval mass produced within a certain time frame or based
on a particular feedstock, similar to a typical livestock rearing system (chicken, beef, etc.).
In this manual, however, we follow a waste management perspective. In other words, we start
from the premise that biowaste is the substance of concern for which we suggest to use the BSF
treatment technology as a suitable processing and recycling solution to produce larvae and waste
residue.
The primary goal, therefore, is to process biowaste in an efficient way with regard to investment
and operational costs, as well as space requirements. By processing biowaste, threats to public
health and the environment can be reduced.
The technology solution consists of feeding segregated biowaste to BSF larvae, which have been
reared in a nursery. Larvae grow on the waste feedstock and reduce the waste mass. At the end
of the process, larvae are harvested and, if necessary, post-processed into a suitable animal feed
product. The waste residue can also be further processed and potentially sold or used as soil
amendment with fertilizing properties.
This guide has been prepared for practical use. It explains the required materials and equipment,
as well as each working step, similar to a cookbook with its respective recipes. It includes all
information required to develop and operate a medium-sized Black Soldier Fly larvae
waste processing facility, able to treat 5 tons of waste per day. The book also contains other
scenarios of scale in which the amount of work is less. Work plans and instructions for these
scenarios are available via web links.
It is worth mentioning that the approach presented in this handbook is one among many. It is
based on locally available equipment and limited automation. The operations presented here have
proven to work, but selected steps may individually be replaced with other procedures depending
on the given context or experience.
Given the approach of this handbook, it targets readers with little or only some basic knowledge
of waste management in general and Black Soldier Fly technology in particular, who have the will-
ingness to work with waste and to implement and operate such a facility. This guidance can also
be helpful to someone who has already started with BSF treatment and is interested in obtaining
other viewpoints on how things could be done.
2
Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing1.3
Navigating through this guide
The manual is structured according to the three main processing units that are key to a BSF process-
ing facility (Figure 1 –1).
1. BSF rearing unit
2. BSFL waste conversion unit (pre-processing, treatment, harvesting)
3. Post processing unit (larvae refining and residue processing)
BSF treatment
facility
Post-processing
Rearing
Residue refining
BSFL conversion
Waste sourcing
Pre-processing
Treatment
Product harvesting
Larvae refining
Product
marketing
Figure 1–1: The different units of a BSF treatment system
Although proper “waste sourcing” is of crucial importance to a well-functioning BSF facility, this
aspect is not discussed in detail in this manual.
Throughout the text, you will come across the following icons. They indicate issues of particular
importance, background information or access to further information material.
Highlights issues of high importance
Highlights detailed information for interested readers, but is not
required reading
Link to more detailed information, templates and factsheets
Link to the e-learning video series on BSF Biowaste Processing
Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing
34
Black Soldier Fly Biowaste ProcessingChapter 2:
Introduction into BSF
biowaste processing
This chapter takes a closer look at the life cycle of the Black Soldier Fly. Understanding the life
cycle helps to know why BSF is a suitable insect for organic waste management and to learn how
this cycle can be “engineered” to enhance the benefits produced in terms of waste conversion
efficiency and product harvest in quantity and quality.
2.1
The Black Soldier Fly
The Black Soldier Fly, Hermetia illucens, is of the dipteran family Stratiomyidae. It can be encoun-
tered in nature worldwide in the tropical and sub-tropical areas between the latitudes of 40°S and
45°N (Figure 2–1).
45 ̊ N
40 ̊ S
Figure 2–1: Distribution area of the Black Soldier Fly, Hermetia illucens
The egg starts a BSF life cycle and at the same time marks the end of the previous life stage: a
fly laying a cluster of eggs (also called ovipositing). The female fly lays a package of 400 to 800
eggs close to decomposing organic matter, into small, dry, sheltered cavities. Shortly after having
laid the eggs, the female dies. The closeness of the eggs to the decomposing organic matter
ensures that the larvae have their first food source nearby after hatching. The sheltered cavities
protect the eggs from predators
and prevent dehydration of the
egg packages by direct sunlight.
On average, the eggs hatch after
four days and the emerged lar-
vae, which are barely visible, will
search for food and start feeding
on the organic material nearby.
The larvae feed voraciously on
Figure 2–2: Drawing of a Black Soldier Fly larva (Schremmer, 1986)
Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing
5the decomposing organic matter and grow from less than one millimeter to around 2.5 cm length
and 0.5 cm width, and are of cream-like colour. The different life stages are shown in Figure 2–2
and Figure 2–3.
Under optimal conditions with ideal food quality and quantity, the growth of the larvae will require
a period of 14 - 16 days. However, the BSF larva is a very resilient organism and has the ability to
extend its life cycle under unfavourable conditions. The larval stage is the only stage during which
the BSF feeds and, therefore, it is during this time of larval development that enough fat reserves
and protein are stored that allow the larvae to undergo pupation, emerge as flies, find mates, cop-
ulate and (as a female) lay eggs before dying.
After having gone through five larval stages, the larvae reach the final larval stage: the prepupa.
When transforming into a prepupa, the larva replaces its mouthpart with a hook-shaped structure
and becomes dark brown to charcoal grey in colour. It uses this hook to easily move out and away
from the food source towards a nearby dry, humus-like, shaded and protected environment that it
deems safe from predators and this is where the imago emerge from the pupa and fly off without
significant hindrance.
1a: Adult, top view 1b: Adult, side view 2: Females laying eggs
3: Larvae feeding 4: Prepupa 5: Pupae
Figure 2–3: Life stages of the Black Soldier Fly, Hermetia illucens, Photos: Nandayure Studt Solano (1a, 1b),
Samuel Blyth (2, 3, 4), Sandec (5)
The process of pupation is the transformation from a pupa into a fly. The pupation stage is initiat-
ed when the prepupa finds a suitable location and becomes immobile and stiff. For a successful
pupation, it is best if the environmental conditions do not change too much or, in other words, that
they remain warm, shaded and protected from rain. Pupation takes around two to three weeks
and ends when the fly emerges from its pupa shell. The emerging process is a very short proce-
dure. It takes less than five minutes for the fly to break open the part of the pupa that used to be
the head section, crawl out, dry and then spread its wings and fly off.
After emerging, the fly lives for about one week. During this short life, it will search for a partner,
copulate and (for the female) lay eggs. As a fly, BSF do not feed. Only a source of water or a humid
surface is required to stay hydrated. What is important in this life stage is an abundant amount of
natural light and a warm temperature (25 - 32°C). A humid environment may prolong the life span
6
Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processingand, thus, enhance the chance for successful reproduction. It has been observed that the flies
prefer to copulate in the light of the morning. After copulation, the females then search for an ideal
location to lay their eggs as explained above.
Optimal environmental conditions and food sources for the larvae can be summarized as:
· Warm climate: the ideal temperature is between 24 and 30°C. If too hot, the larvae will crawl
away from the food in search of a cooler location. If too cold, the larvae will slow down their
metabolism, eat less and develop slower.
· Shaded environment: larvae avoid light and will always search for a shaded environment,
away from sunlight. If their food source is exposed to light, they will move deeper into the layer
of food to escape the light.
· Water content of the food: the food source has to be quite moist with a water content be-
tween 60% and 90% so that the larvae can ingest the substance. In the engineered life cycle
we aim at 70 - 80%.
· Nutrient requirements of the food: substrates rich in protein and easily available carbohy-
drates result in good larval growth. Ongoing research indicates that substrate may be more eas-
ily consumed by the larvae if it has already undergone some bacterial or fungal decomposition
process.
· Particle size of the food: as the larvae have no chewing mouthparts, access to nutrients is
easier if the substrate comes in small pieces or even as a slurry.
2.2
Why the Black Soldier Fly?
Several key attributes make BSF promising organisms to manage and “engineer” so that they
can be used as an attractive treatment technology for biowaste from the perspective of waste
managers and businesses:
· Waste biomass is converted into larvae and residue. The larvae consist of ±35% protein and
±30% crude fat (based on dry mass). This insect protein is of high quality and is an important
feed resource for animal feed. Feed trials have confirmed that it is a suitable alternative to fish
meal.
· Feeding waste to larvae has shown to inactivate disease transmitting bacteria, such as
Salmonella spp. This implies that the risk of disease transmission between animals and be-
tween animals and humans is reduced when using this technology at farm level or when
treating waste of animal origin in general (e.g. chicken manure or slaughterhouse waste). How-
ever, risk reduction is achieved mainly through material reduction (±80%) rather than through
pathogen inactivation.
· Waste reduction of up to 80 % on wet weight basis has been demonstrated. If BSF processing
is applied at or close to the source of biowaste generation, the costs for waste transport and
space requirements for landfills can, thus, be reduced drastically. Such organic waste treat-
ment could furthermore reduce open dumping, which is still an unfortunate reality in low- and
middle-income settings.
· The residue, a substance similar to compost, contains nutrients and organic matter and, when
used in agriculture, helps to improve soil conditions.
· A high waste-to-biomass conversion rate of 15 - 20% on wet weight basis has been demon-
strated, which is a satisfactory output quantity from a business perspective.
· There is no need for sophisticated high-end technology to operate such a facility. Therefore, it
is suitable for low-income settings that rely mostly on simple technology and unskilled labour.
Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing
72.3
Engineering the BSF life cycle
In an engineered BSF processing facility, we can differentiate distinct processing units as shown
in Figure 2–4.
BSF treatment
facility
Post-processing
Rearing
Residue refining
BSFL conversion
Pre-processing
Treatment
Product harvesting
Larvae refining
BSF rearing unit
This ensures that a reliable and consistent amount of small larvae (called 5-DOL) is al-
ways available to inoculate the daily amount of biowaste that is received for processing
at the treatment facility. A certain number of larvae hatchlings are, however, kept in
the rearing unit to grow and pupate, to ensure a stable breeding population.
BSFL conversion unit
It is critical that the waste received at the facility is suitable for feeding to the larvae.
A first step involves a control of the waste to ensure it contains no hazardous materials
and no inorganic substances. Further steps then involve a reduction of the waste parti-
cle size and a blending of different organic waste types to create a suitable balanced diet
and moisture content (70 - 80%) for the larvae. Then, 5-DOL from the rearing unit are fed
with biowaste in the “incubator” and/or “larvero” containers. The young larvae feed on
the substrate, grow into large larvae and, thus, process and reduce the waste. Shortly
before turning into pre-pupae, the larvae are harvested from the larveros. The residue
itself is also a product of value.
Post-processing unit
Both products, larvae and residue, can be further processed. We call this “post-process-
ing”. Typically, a first step is to kill the larvae. Other steps of larvae refinement include
drying the larvae, and separating dried larvae into larvae oil from larvae protein meal.
A typical step for residue refinement is composting or feeding the residue into a biogas
digester for fuel production.
Figure 2–4: Units of a BSF treatment facility
8
Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing2.4
Safety and hygiene measures when working with BSF and biowaste
During operation of a BSF facility, measures that protect the health of the workers as well as the
animals are also a necessity.
Although operation of a BSF facility does not entail high hazards to health, employees are never-
theless exposed to threats such as noise, dust or gaseous emissions as well as exposed to patho-
gens that may enter the facility through the organic waste. It is therefore important that adequate
protective clothing and equipment is always available for the workers. Even if wearing of boots or
gloves will meet with little enthusiasm among the employees, especially in a tropical climate, it is
the responsibility of the operator to enforce such measures and to set a good example.
As in other livestock farms, care must be taken to maintain hygienic conditions in a BSF facility.
The main focus is to prevent the spread of diseases and keeping pests away. For this reason,
regular activities that guarantee hygienic conditions must be included in the work plans. This
includes the regular cleaning of work surfaces with alcohol as well as the safe storage of animal
feed or structural measures that prevent rats or birds from entering sensitive areas of the facility.
Maintaining general order in all areas of the facility and daily cleaning of utensils should be stand-
ard practice. The facility should also have its own waste concept, which ensures that potentially
contaminated materials are stored and disposed of safely.
The schedules used in this manual all include regular tasks to maintain hygiene and safety in the
facility. We recommend that operators place as much emphasis on the carrying out of these tasks
as they do on those directly related to BSF operation.
The following equipment is part of the standard personal protective and cleaning equipment at
any BSF facility:
Broom and dustpan Facemask Work coat Latex-/Lab gloves
Rubber boots Face shield Rubber gloves Heat resistant gloves
Scrubbing brush Washing machine Cleaning alcohol
Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing
910 Black Soldier Fly Biowaste ProcessingChapter 3:
The BSF rearing process
3.1
Rearing BSF in a controlled environment
To ensure the treatment of a defined amount of waste on a regular basis, the rearing unit needs
to provide a defined number of five day old larvae, so-called 5-DOL, every day. It is, therefore,
important to control all single production steps during rearing and to monitor the performance
of each step. In a well-engineered BSF nursery, it is possible and easy to control the number of
pre-pupae that are allowed to pupate. This helps estimate the number of flies that shall emerge,
which in turn provides an indication of how many egg packages will be deposited, how many
larvae will hatch and how many of these larvae are available for biowaste treatment. Monitoring
of the survival rates at every step in this cycle keeps track of the colony’s overall performance and
indicates problems at any particular step. Survival rates may differ from one nursery to another.
Data provided here are based on a rearing unit in Indonesia (Figure 3–1) and serve as an example.
9,300
85%
11,000
Flies
Pupae
250 eggs/fly
85%
Prepupae
13,000
Eggs
2,3 million
5-DOL
90%
60%
Residue
14,000
5-DOL
1,4 million
400 kg
Waste
Treatment
1 ton (25% DM)
Fresh larvae Dried larvae
170 kg 45 kg
Figure 3–1: Performance indicators of a BSF rearing facility in Indonesia
Egg deposition and egg harvest
From a management perspective, it is important that all egg packages are concentrated in few
specific locations. This will significantly facilitate harvesting of the eggs.
For this, we supply the cages with a suitable medium (called “eggies”) that satisfies the flies’
requirements regarding a safe location (i.e. sheltered cavities) for egg deposition, as well as an
“attractant” which mimics decomposing organic matter that attracts the female to lay eggs close
by. Once the egg packages are deposited into the eggies, they are harvested before any larvae
hatch. After the eggs are harvested, they are removed from the eggies and placed into egg hold-
ers which are then placed over some feed so that the hatchlings can directly start to feed once
they hatch and drop from the egg holders into the feed (see Figure 3–2).
Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing 11Scraping off eggs from the Weighing of egg mass on a Egg holder placed in the
egg media precision balance hatchling shower
Figure 3–2: Handling of the egg harvest
Egg hatching and larvae feeding
The unit which accommodates the egg holders and the nursery boxes containing the feed for the
hatchlings is called the “hatchling shower” (Figure 3–3). The eggs will hatch over a period of sev-
eral days and the hatchlings will constantly fall into the hatchling container below where they will
immediately start feeding. This hatchling container is exchanged on a regular basis. This allows
cohorts of young larvae of the same age to be together in each container. Placing recently harvest-
ed eggies together with the older eggies guarantees a constant “shower” of hatchlings into the
hatchling container. A high quality food source in the hatchling container consists of chicken feed
for starter broiler chicks, mixed with water. This feed seems to be the most readily available nu-
tritious material to ensure fast growth of the larvae although it is costly. Alternative materials that
can be used, often available free of charge, are soy-based (e.g. soy milk), dairy-based (e.g. expired
milk powder) and/or grain-based (e.g. expired bread) waste products. It is important though that
the nutritional content of the mixture remains stable given the strict and regular feeding schedule.
This mixture of feed should have a water content of around 70 % which results in the ideal sub-
strate texture for the larvae to feed on.
Figure 3–3: Hatchling shower: harvested egg mass is placed in holders
above a feed source for the newly hatched larvae. Each paperclip colour
represents a different day of the week when egg were harvested
Waste management with BSF larvae is easiest
with uniform larvae (same age and size). This
allows for better planning of the waste input,
conversion rate and harvesting time. By using
the hatchling shower, the number and age of
young larvae in one hatchling container can be
controlled and determined. The frequency of
replacing the hatchling container determines
the uniformity of the batch of larvae. The high-
er the frequency of replacement, the higher the
uniformity of the young larvae. After hatching,
larvae remain in the same hatchling container
for five days to feed. Then the 5-DOL are har-
vested from the hatchling containers, counted
and a main share is then transferred to the BSF
treatment unit where these 5-DOL are added to
the substrate.
As counting all these small larvae is too much work, the number of 5-DOL is estimated by count-
ing the number of larvae in a small sample (~2g), which then is extrapolated based on the total
weight of all 5-DOL.
12 Black Soldier Fly Biowaste ProcessingThe hatchling container below the hatchling shower is replaced with a new hatchling con-
tainer at regular intervals (every one to three days). The frequency determines the uniform-
ity of the batch of larvae.
A small fraction of the 5-DOL (1- 2 %) is kept in
the rearing unit depending on the amount of sub-
strate to be processed and the performance of
the nursery. High survival rates and many eggs
per female will require that less 5-DOL are kept
in the rearing unit. The retained larvae are placed
into a nursery container where they are continu-
ously fed with a well-defined feed mixture until
they transform into pre-pupae within about three
weeks after hatching. All larvae in one nursery
container will transform around the same time
as they are of the same age. The pre-pupae
will leave the food source in search for a more
suitable dry location to pupate. To collect these
migrating larvae, the nursery container is placed
into a transfer container with a dry, water ab-
sorbing material (Figure 3–4).
Figure 3–4: Nursery containers standing in transfer containers
Pupation
Pre-pupae that have crawled into the transfer container are harvested and transferred into a pu-
pation container. As pre-pupae are disturbed when too close to other pre-pupae, the containers
contain a moist soil-like substrate (compost) into which the pre-pupae can bury (Figure 3–5).
Figure 3–5: Pre-pupae being added onto the pupation
Figure 3–6: Pupation boxes in pupation rack
material in the pupation crate
Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing 13The density of pre-pupae in the pupation container influences how quickly the pre-pupae settle
down and stiffen their bodies to start their transformation into pupae. To facilitate the pupation
process, the pupation containers are first placed in a pupation rack (Figure 3–6) where pre-pupae
are continuously added in smaller amounts into the pupation crates over a period of 5 days. For
the pupation process, the pupae are placed inside a pupation cage, which is completely dark in-
side (Figure 3–7). We call these “dark cages”. In addition to the dark environment, this cage also
provides the pupae with sufficient protection from the changing outside environmental conditions
(i.e. moisture, temperature, movement of air, etc.). After two to three weeks, the pupation mate-
rial has slightly dried out, making it easier for the flies to crawl out of the pupal skin to the top of
the material and fly out of the pupation containers. But they still remain contained in the dark cage.
Due to the darkness inside the cage, the emerged flies will not mate, but will remain motionless.
The flies in the dark cage, thus, are a constant source of “fresh” adult flies which, as soon as they
are released into the light, will start to reproduce.
Figure 3–7: Dark cage with pupation containers Figure 3–8: A love cage is being filled with freshly
stacked within emerged adults
Emergence of the adults starts twelve days after they were put into the pupation box, and the
frequency of emergence then follows a bell-shaped curve and ends with a few latecomers after
25 days (Figure 3–9).
Dismanteling
of dark cage
5 days 7 days 14 days
Pupation container
is filled-up with
prepupae Filled pupation
container in
pupation rack Pupation container in
dark cage
Figure 3–9: Dynamics of pupation and emergence of black soldier flies
14 Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing
TimeMating
Love
cage 1
Love
cage 2
Love
cage 3
Emerged
Emerged flies are collected from the dark
cage and transferred to the love-cage. This
is done by connecting the dark cage with
a tunnel to a cage that is not darkened and
is hanging in a mobile frame. Because this
is the place where mating will take place,
we call it the “love cage” (Figure 3–8). The
light set at the love-cage end of the tunnel
will attract the flies towards the light to fly
from the dark cage into the love cage. A love
cage is consecutively connected to three to
four dark cages to collect the most recently
emerged flies from all these cages (Figure
3–10). This method allows for a constant and
stable density of flies within the love cages.
Moreover, the flies harvested are all of a very
similar age. Same-aged-flies in the love cage
has an important benefit: the flies will copu-
late and lay eggs around the same time and
are, thus, predictable, and allow for a more
efficient nursery operation. The love cages
are equipped with a wet cloth to allow the
flies to hydrate and with eggies and a box
with a smelly attractant. The rearing cycle
has, thus, been closed.
Filling Filling
Filling
Figure 3–10: Composition of three love cages filled at intervals of two days
from four different dark cages
Let there be light
For successful reproduction, Black Soldier Flies require a certain type and intensity of light.
Ideally, this is natural sunlight. In cases where this is not possible, either because of seasonal
variations due to latitude or because the plant must be operated in a room without windows,
sunlight must be replaced (or supported) by artificial light.
When selecting the lamp, attention must be paid to both the spectral composition of the light
and the intensity. The light spectrum with high values in the blue (~440 nm) and green range
(~540 nm) showed good reproduction rates. In addition to the wavelength, however, the pow-
er of the lamp also plays a major role. This is measured in μW/cm 2 and is given in relation to
the distance to the light source. We achieved good results with a light power in the UV range
of 210 μW/cm 2 and an illuminance of about 3,000 – 6,000 lx at a distance of 60 cm 1 .
It is important to ensure a day-night rhythm, with the duration of illumination between 6
and 18 hours per day.
1
Macavei L, Benassi G, Stoian V, et al. (2020) Optimization of Hermetia illucens (L.) egg laying under different nu-
trition and light conditions. PloS ONE 15: and Liu Z, Najar-Rodriguez A, Minor M, et al. (2020) Mating success of
the black soldier fly, Hermetia illucens (Diptera: Stratiomyidae), under four artificial light sources. Journal of Photo-
chemistry and Photobiology B: Biology 205: 111815.
Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing 153.2
Activities in the BSF rearing unit
In this subchapter, the process steps and the materials to use during these steps are presented.
Most of the materials are so called off-the-shelf items which can be purchased at local hardware
stores. Some materials and equipment have been custom-made for the operation. The dimen-
sions of these items are provided in the description under each item.
The technical drawings for the custom-made materials
and equipment used in the operational steps of the BSF rearing
unit can be found through this link.
3.2.1
Fly stage
A love cage is filled with freshly emerged flies from the dark cages. In the love cage, the flies are
provided water to drink and a place to lay their eggs. The love cage presented here can hold up
to 10,000 flies which equals around 84cm 3 per fly. The flies will stay in the love cage for 4 days
where they mate and lay eggs.
Materials and equipment needed:
Love cage
(75 x 75 x 150 cm) Cage hanger and
tunnel clips Mobile cage frame with
attractant light Attractant light
Shade basket Water container Egg media Attractant box
16 Black Soldier Fly Biowaste ProcessingCage moving stick Love cage table Ant trap Precision scale
(max 35 kg, acc 0.5 g)
Ethyl Acetate Flask Precision balance
(max 2 kg, acc 0.01 g) Attractant media
Tasks:
Step 1:
Step 2:
Hang a clean love cage onto its hanger using the loops and measure weight of the love cage with
hanger.
Attach the cage onto the mobile frame and move the frame opposite the first dark cage. Connect
the two tunnels of the cages, using four binder clips. Turn on the attractant light and gently shake
the cage to rouse the flies.
Step 1: Attaching cage to hanger
Step 2: Using the cage moving stick to
hang love cage into mobile frame
Step 3:
Step 4:
After 30 minutes, disconnect and close the tunnels, measure the weight of the love cage and
hanger, attach the hanger with cage onto the mobile frame again and repeat the same process
of connecting, disconnecting and weighing after 30 minutes until the love cage is full (flies are
covering most of the sides but are not piling up on the bottom).
Disconnect the love cage from the last dark cage and turn off the light. Close the tunnels with rope
and measure weight of love cage and hanger. Move the love cage with hanger to the love cage
table using the long stick with a hook and hang up.
Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing 17Step 2: Attaching dark cage to love cage Step 3: Light lures flies from
from inside dark cage into love cage
Step 5:
Step 6:
Step 4: Weighing of love cage after filling
Prepare attractant container: fill an empty attractant container with 100 grams of dead flies, 200
grams of residue from the nursery containers, 200 grams of residue from the old attractant con-
tainer and one litre of water. Mix thoroughly.
Prepare 10 clean eggies: Take clean wooden sheets and separate them between the sheets with
pushpins on both sides and sheets without pushpins. Build up the egg media alternating between
a sheet with and without pushpins until five sheets are stacked. Add two rubber bands on both
ends of the bundle. Prepare 10 of these bundles (eggies) for each love cage.
Step 5: Ingredients of the attractant container
Step 6: Wooden sheets with pushpins to create a gap, allowing space for egg packages. The eggies are held together with two
rubber bands
18 Black Soldier Fly Biowaste ProcessingStep 7:
Step 8:
Prepare water container: Fill a clean container with tap water until it is almost full. Take the lid and
a clean cotton cloth and push the cloth on both side through the incision slits made into the lid.
The towel should lie flat on top of the lid, while its ends pass through the incision slits and are
immersed in the water in the container. Sprinkle the towel with water.
Open the love cage. Collect 20 flies in a jar. Then place the attractant container with 10 clean
eggies cross-stacked on top into the love cage. Cover the attractant container and eggies with the
shading basket. Place the water container onto the shading basket and close the love cage.
Step 7: Adding water onto water container to moisturise
Step 8: The whole eggie-set-up
the cloth
Step 9:
After closing the love cage, add a sticker on the table under the cage labelling the date of place-
ment. The cage should now be fixed as displayed in the figure below.
Step 9: Leg of love cage table is placed in ant trap
Step 9: Newly set-up love cage
Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing 19PROTECTIVE MEASURES FOR WORKERS:
· Pay attention to the light attached to the mobile frame and avoid burns.
· Use lab coat and latex gloves when handling attractant.
POINTS OF MONITORING AND DATA COLLECTION:
· Weighing the love cage after every connection to a dark cage (Step 3) allows for the
monitoring of the emergence rate from dark cages and yields the total number of flies in
a love cage. A reference sample of 20 flies is taken from the filled cage with a cylindrical
container. The flies in the cylindrical container are brought to the laboratory where the
container is quickly turned upside down on a smaller cylindrical container with cork chips
sprinkled with 10 - 15 drops of ethyl acetate. This is left for 30 seconds to paralyze the
flies, so that they can then be easily weighed with a precision balance. Divide difference
of empty and full love cage by the average weight of one fly to obtain the number of flies
in the love cage.
The fly stage module from the e-learning video series on
BSF Biowaste Processing is available through this link.
20 Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing3.2.2
Egg Stage
Love cages are removed after four days of use. No more eggs will be laid after this period as
most females die within one week. Eggies are removed from the love cage and the eggs are then
scraped off the eggies. The eggs are placed in a holder which is hung up in the hatchling shower
where newly hatched larvae fall into the hatchling container. 10,000 flies in a cage produce around
75 grams of eggs. The capacity of one egg holder is 40 grams which means around two egg
holders are filled with the eggs from one love cage. The hatchling container is replaced regularly
and the same age cohort of larvae feed in the same container until they are used for the waste
treatment. Each hatchling container can receive the equivalent of 40 grams of hatched eggs.
Materials and equipment needed:
Tweezers
Hatchling Shower Rack
(150 x 90 x 65)
Precision balance
(max 2 kg, acc 0.01 g) Egg holder and
coloured paperclips Hatchling container
(60 x 40 x 12 cm)
Water Chicken feed
(Protein 23%, Water 13%,
Fat 5%, Fibers: 5%
& ash 7%.) Cocopeat
Tasks:
Step 1:
Step 2:
Step 3:
Remove the eggies from the love cage, 4 days
(4 x 24 h) after the love cage was setup.
Remove the old attractant container. Use
200 grams of old attractant residue for filling a
new attractant container. Empty the remainder
of the residue into the organic waste bin. Clean
the attractant container with detergent and let
it dry.
Sweep the dead flies from the love cage you are
dismantling. Keep 100 grams of dead flies for
filling the new attractant container and dispose
of the others into the organic waste bin.
Step 1: Removing eggies from love cage
Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing 21Step 4:
Disconnect the hanger with love cage from the love cage table, remove the hanger and turn
the love cage inside out, shake it to remove the last (dead) flies and place the love cage into the
washing machine, add detergent and wash it on a 30°C program. Remove the love cage from the
washing machine and let it dry.
Step 4: Dismantling the love cage
Step 5:
Step 4: Wash Love cage after every use in washing machine
Clean the love cage table where the old cage was attached. Spray the same space with a 95%
alcohol solution, spread it out with a cloth and let the alcohol dry. Remove the date label of this
love cage from the table.
Step 6: Remove one week old egg holders from hatchling shower
Step 6:
Step 7:
From the hatchling shower frame, remove all the egg media holders with the colour coded clip of
the current weekday. Egg media holders are marked with a paper clip in a particular colour accord-
ing to the day they were put onto the hatchling shower (e.g. Monday = Yellow, Tuesday = Purple,
Wednesday = Grey, etc.). Egg media holders with today’s colour-code have been hanging in the
hatchling shower for one week and all the eggs have already hatched.
Take the 10 eggies removed from the dismantled love cage and carefully open the wooden sheets
of the first eggie by removing the two rubber bands on each end. Use a tweezer to carefully
scrape off the eggs on both sides of each of the five sheets making up one eggies. Collect the
egg mass in a small bowl. Repeat the process for the other 9 eggies and then for the other love
cages dismantled on the same day.
22 Black Soldier Fly Biowaste ProcessingStep 8:
Weigh the total collected egg mass from all eggies removed from one love cage. Divide the egg
mass up in portions of 40 grams, open the first egg media holder and add the first batch of 40
gram egg mass. Repeat this process ensuring that the amount of egg mass is max 40 grams per
holder and the amount added to each holder is the same. Then hang the holders in the hatchling
shower ensuring that at least one holder is hung over a hatchling container each day
Step 8: Fill egg holders with egg mass
Step 9:
Step 8: Attach color coded paperclip to egg holder
Prepare the hatchling container. Each hatchling container replaces the previously setup hatchling
container in the shower rack. For each hatchling container produce a 3kg mixture of 30% dry
chicken (broiler) feed and 70% water. Stir the mixture until it has become a homogeneous sub-
stance. Fill the hatchling containers each with the 3kg mixture. Cover each hatchling container
with dry and sieved cocopeat or wheat bran (0.5-1.0 cm thickness) to avoid loss of moisture. Add
labels to each hatchling container with the date code of the current day.
Step 9: Hatchling container is filled with 3kg of Step 9: The nursery feed is covered with a thin layer of
fresh larva feed cocopeat to avoid moisture loss
Step 10: Move all existing hatchling containers in the shelves down by one shelve. The lowest hatchling
containers will have five day old larvae. In the now empty top-most shelve, add the new hatchling
containers.
Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing 23PROTECTIVE MEASURES FOR WORKERS:
· Mask and glasses to protect face from eggs and small larvae.
· Use lab coat and latex gloves for handling eggies, attractant, dead flies and detergent.
POINTS OF MONITORING AND DATA COLLECTION:
· Measure weight of the eggs in the removed egg media. See Step 7 for details.
· Calculate the number of eggs harvested:
· Total number of eggs harvested: E total (number)
· Total mass of eggs harvested: M total (gram)
· Mass of one egg: M egg (gram) = 0.0000291 grams per egg
E total = M total / M egg
The egg stage module from the e-learning video series on
BSF Biowaste Processing is available through this link.
24 Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing3.2.3
Hatchling stage
The 5-DOL are harvested from the hatchling container. At the age of 5 days old, this crate has the
capacity to hold around 700,000 larvae or 73 larvae per cm 3 . The 5-DOL are then separated from
the residue and their total number is determined.
Materials and equipment needed:
Sieve
(mesh size 0.8 mm) Cup Residue container
(60 x 40 x 12 cm) Scoop
Precision balance
(max 2 kg, acc 0.01 g) Plate Tweezers and click
counter Cups and tray
Tasks:
Step 1:
Remove the oldest (after 6 days) hatchling con-
tainers from the shower rack. If you have multi-
ple containers, mix them together. Use a manual
sieve (mesh size 0.8 mm) to sieve all the material
in the hatchling containers. The small residual
particles together with the small larvae will fall
through the sieve into a container, while larger
residue particles and larvae stay on the sieve.
The larger residue and larvae that stay on the
sieve are placed in a plastic box. From this box,
the larger residual particles are scooped off with
a spoon as much as possible and stored else-
where until lumps of 5-DOL are clearly visible
(while some residue will still also remain). Tap-
ping on the wall of the plastic box will help to
separate larvae from residue as the vibrations
make the larvae aggregate.
Step 1: Scooping off residue from the 5-DOL to create a
pure fraction
Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing 25Step 2:
Step 3:
Clean the hatchling containers with the pressure washer, a scrubbing brush and detergent and let
dry.
Take a random scoop from the purified 5-DOL mixture and measure two grams each of the mix-
ture into two cups.
Step 3: After mixing to homogenize the purified section Step 4 : The 5-DOL contained in the 2 gram samples (including
of 5-DOL, a random scoop is taken the unavoidable remaining residue) are counted
Step 4:
Step 6:
Step 7:
Step 8:
Place these two grams of 5-DOL mixture from the cup onto a plate. On the plate, manually count
all the 5-DOL using tweezers and a click counter, by pushing them into a bowl. Repeat the process
for the second cup as well. Document the result as number of 5-DOL per two grams.
Weigh the total mass of all 5-DOL available in the box. Using the results of the count per two
grams, calculate the total number of larvae in that box. See calculation below.
Based on the number of incubator units to be set-up (which depends on the substrate amount),
prepare cups and fill each cup with the weight of 5-DOL mixture from the box, as needed for each
larvero. See calculation below.
The remaining 5-DOL will then be used for rearing flies or discarded (see Fly stage)
Step 6: Portioning of 5-DOL for the preparation of
the incubator units
26 Black Soldier Fly Biowaste ProcessingPROTECTIVE MEASURES FOR WORKERS:
· Use lab coat and latex gloves for handling 5-DOL and residue.
POINTS OF MONITORING AND DATA COLLECTION:
· Calculating the number of larvae in the box:
· Total number of larvae in box: L total (number)
· Total mass of larvae in box: M total (gram)
· Number of larvae in sample: L sample (number)
· Mass of sample: M sample (gram)
L total = M total * L sample / M sample
POINTS OF MONITORING AND DATA COLLECTION:
· Calculating the mass of larvae needed per larvero
· Mass of larvae needed per larvero: M larvero (gram)
· Number of larvae required per larvero: L larvero (number)
(we calculate with 600-800 larvae per kg of wet substrate fed during the
whole treatment period)
· Total mass of larvae in box: M total (gram)
· Total number of larvae in box: L total (number)
M larvero = L larvero * M total / L total
The hatchling stage module from the e-learning
video series on BSF Biowaste Processing is available
through this link.
Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing 273.2.4
Larval growth stage
The nursery containers provide the pre-pupae which go into the pupation containers to maintain
the necessary adult population. The required number of 5-DOL are fed for approximately two and
a half weeks until they turn into pre-pupae. During this time, 10,000 larvae are kept in one nursery
Larvero or at a density of 5 larvae per cm 2 .
Materials and equipment needed:
Nursery Larvero rack
(150 x 45 x 65 cm) Nursery Larvero
(55 x 35 x 14) and transfer
container (60 x 40 x 12 cm) Precision scale
(max 35 kg, acc 0.5 g) Spade
Beaker
(3 L) Bulk scale
(max 150 kg, acc 50 g) Bin
(80 L) Water
Chicken feed
(Protein 23%, Water 13%,
Fat 5%, Fibers 5%
& ash 7%.) Cocopeat
28 Black Soldier Fly Biowaste ProcessingTasks:
Step 1:
Step 2:
Step 3:
Step 4:
Step 5:
Step 6:
Step 7:
Prepare 2 kg of food made up of 30% dry chicken feed and 70% water. Stir it until it is a homoge-
neous mixture.
Take a clean nursery larvero and add this food to it, cover it with cocopeat or wheat bran (layer of
0.5-1.0 cm) and then add 10,000 5-DOL on top of the coco peat.
Step 3: Put cocopeat in the corners of the transfer Step 3: Place the nursery container with the 10,000 5-DOL into
box to hinder the pre-pupae from escaping the transfer container
Take a clean transfer container and add cocope-
at into the corners and along the edges of the
container and place the nursery larveros into
it. Since pre-pupae will eventually crawl out of
the nursery larveros and fall into the transfer
crate, the nursery larveros (35x55cm) needs to
be slightly smaller than the transfer container
(40x60cm). Put the two on the nursery shelf.
Place a sticker with the date code and the
amount of larvae that have been added on the
nursery larvero.
During the two and a half weeks of operation,
the nursery larveros receive a mixture of chick-
en feed and water in different concentrations.
This mixture is fed on specific days within the
time period according to feeding schedules (see
Annex B).
After two and a half weeks (see Annex B), the
nursery larvero is removed and the remaining
pre-pupae in the transfer container are har-
vested (see also the activities in the pre-pupae
stage)
Remove the residue in the old nursery larveros.
The residue can be composted. Clean the nurs-
ery larvero and transfer container with a scrub-
bing brush and detergent and let dry.
Step 4: Place sticker on nursery larvero
Step 5: Add feed to nursery larveros during weeks of
feeding
Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing 29PROTECTIVE MEASURES FOR WORKERS:
· Use lab coat and latex gloves for handling larvae and residue.
POINTS OF MONITORING AND DATA COLLECTION:
· None.
The larval growth stage module from the e-learning
video series on BSF Biowaste Processing is available through
this link.
30 Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing3.2.5
Pre-pupae stage
The pre-pupae, which have crawled out from the nursery containers, are placed into the pupation
containers which later are put into the dark cage. Over a duration of 5 days, the pre-pupae are
added into the pupation substrate which has a thickness of around 5 cm in the pupation crates. Up
to 10,000 pre-pupae fit in one pupation crate or around 1 pre-pupa per cm 3 of pupation material.
Materials and equipment needed:
Mixer
(max cap. 300 kg) Compost or other
soil-like material Water Pupation containers
(60 x 40 x 12 cm)
Pupation rack
(190 x 45 x 60 cm) Precision scale
(max 35 kg, acc 0.5 g) Precision balance
(max 2 kg, acc 0.01 g) Cup
Bin
(80 L) Sieve
(60 x 40 x 10, mesh
size 3 mm) Collection container
(30 x 20 x 12) Bulk scale
(max 150 kg, acc 50 g)
Tasks:
Step 1:
Prepare pupation material: 50 kg of pupation material is made of mature compost (3⁄4) and water
(1⁄4). Mix it thoroughly with a concrete mixer until no dry material is visible and the mixture is ho-
mogeneous.
Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing 31Step 1: Mixing dry compost with water
Step 2:
Step 3:
Step 4:
Step 1: Stir the materials into a moist pupation substrate
Take 16 clean pupation containers and fill them each with 3 kg of the prepared pupation material.
Spread the mixture equally over each crate.
Place the 16 pupation containers in the pupation rack and add a sticker with the date of setup.
Harvest the pre-pupae together with the cocopeat from the transfer container and separate the
pre-pupae from the cocopeat with a sieve. The empty transfer container is then filled again with
cocopeat and the nursery container is placed in it again. This same process is repeated for each
transfer container assigned to be harvested that day. Note the weight of the harvested pre-pupae
for each individual container for monitoring purposes.
Step 4: The pre-pupae are separated from the cocopeat Step 5: Counting of 200 pre-pupae to assess the average weight
by sieving it with a 3 mm sieve for portioning them to the pupation containers
Step 5:
Step 6:
Step 7:
Pool all harvested pre-pupae from each transfer container harvested this day and weigh the har-
vested pre-pupae on a bulk balance. From these pooled pre-pupae, two samples of 200 pre-pu-
pae are weighed, counted and its average is noted down.
Prepare 16 batches of pre-pupae according to the amount required by the checklist (Annex A), one
batch for each pupation crate that will receive pre-pupae.
Transfer the 16 batches of pre-pupae into each of the 16 pupation boxes. The same pupation box-
es are filled with the same number of pre-pupae over several days, according to the respective
schedule (see Annex A).
32 Black Soldier Fly Biowaste ProcessingStep 6: Prepare batches of pre-pupae in cups
PROTECTIVE MEASURES FOR WORKERS:
· Use lab coat and latex gloves for handling larvae, pre-pupae, coco-peat and compost.
POINTS OF MONITORING AND DATA COLLECTION:
· The weight of pre-pupae harvest from each transfer container is measured.
· The weight of 200 pre-pupae is measured. This is repeated twice to obtain
an average value.
The pre-pupae stage module from the e-learning video
series on BSF Biowaste Processing is available through this
link.
Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing 333.2.6
Pupae stage
Pupation containers are placed into a dark cage where flies will emerge and eventually move to a
love cage. The dark cage can hold 16 pupation crates with each 10,000 pupae (10 cm 3 per pupa).
Materials and equipment needed:
Dark cage
(150 x 150 x 75 cm)
Dark cage frame
(170 x 155 x 80 cm)
Ant trap
Tasks:
Step 1:
Hang a clean dark cage onto the dark cage frame using four ropes to tie it in the top corners to the
frame. Open the zipper door in the front of the cage and close the round tunnel opening.
Step 1: Hanging up new dark cage
Step 2:
Step 3:
Ensure that the bottom of the dark cage lies on the dark cage frame table which has its table legs
placed in ant traps.
Fill the new dark cage with 16 pupation containers as prepared following the activities in the
pre-pupae stage. Cross-stack the pupation containers. Make sure that enough open space re-
mains between the containers so that the emerged flies can exit the containers.
34 Black Soldier Fly Biowaste ProcessingStep 3: Filling dark cage with pupation containers and closing the zipper/tunnel so flies can’t escape and the cage is dark
Step 4:
Step 5:
Step 6:
Step 7:
Step 8:
Step 9:
Label the dark cage on the frame with the date of its set-up.
Remove the 16 pupation containers from the cage that needs to be dismantled today according
to the schedule. Empty them into a dustbin. Use the pressure washer, a scrubbing brush and
detergent to clean the 16 crates and store them to dry.
If present, remove dead flies from the dark cage with a brush and dispose of them in a dustbin.
Detach the dark cage from the frame and turn the dark cage inside out and wash with detergent in
a washing machine using a 30°C program. Then, remove the dark cage from the washing machine
and let dry.
Clean the dark cage frame. Spray the frame with a 95% alcohol solution, spread it out with a cloth
and let the alcohol dry.
Remove the date label from the frame.
PROTECTIVE MEASURES FOR WORKERS:
· Use lab coat and latex gloves for handling pupation containers, dirty dark
cages and detergent.
POINTS OF MONITORING AND DATA COLLECTION:
· None required.
The pupae stage module from the e-learning video series
on BSF Biowaste Processing is available through this link.
Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing 353.3
Work scheduling and data management
The activities covered in this chapter all relate to the rearing of the Black Soldier Fly. Although
the system proposed has a simple and low-tech design, the large amount of handlings can make
the operation complex. A work schedule is available (see Annex A) that helps structure all the
handlings in a step-by-step approach thereby creating an organised overview of which steps must
be performed each day. The steps are organised according to the order in which they have to be
executed on the given days. The operator should therefore always start at the top of the checklist
and work down the list after completing each task. This will ensure that a later step will not be
hindered by a previous step that has not been completed. Working through the list systematically
from top to bottom ensures a smoother flow of the process and increases the performance of
the operators.
At different moments during the operational steps and as shown in the work schedule, data
needs to be collected and entered to ensure monitoring and a good overview of the rearing cycle
performance. Digital systems may be available to assist with direct input of the data to produce
overviews of performance. However, if digital tools and software are not available, we recom-
mend a simple paper log sheet that is available in Annex D. The log sheet allows entry of data on
egg mass, 5-DOL count, pre-pupae mass, pupae input and fly mass. How to collect this data is
explained in the respective stages of this chapter.
36 Black Soldier Fly Biowaste ProcessingBlack Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing 3738 Black Soldier Fly Biowaste ProcessingChapter 4:
BSFL conversion operations
4.1
Sourcing biowaste
Larvae are generally very tolerant when it comes to feeding substrates. Yet, it is important that
the biowaste received at the facility is suitable as larva feed. With a water content between 60%
to 90% and a specific particle size, most organic materials will be treated in one way or the other.
A list of biowastes known to result in satisfactory growth and biomass conversion is shown in
Table 4–1. The larvae strongly rely on symbiotic microorganisms which degrade cell structures
and make nutrients available for the larvae to take up. With suboptimal feed, development time
will be extended and the final larval weight will be lower. It is important to keep this in mind when
looking at the BSF facility from an economic perspective.
Table 4–1: Different types of biowaste found suitable for BSF treatment
Municipal waste Agro-industrial waste Manure and faeces
· Municipal organic waste
· Food and restaurant waste
· Market waste · Food processing waste
· Spent grains
· Slaughterhouse waste · Poultry manure
· Pig manure
· Human faeces
This guide assumes that “waste sourcing” for the facility has been arranged and secured. The bio-
waste should be purely organic and biodegradable, and meet the criteria of appropriate biowaste
types as mentioned above.
Waste sourcing
In order to guarantee a reliable operation of the BSF facility, a constant waste source of con-
sistent quality is of utmost importance. It is therefore advisable to negotiate long-term con-
tracts with local waste producers once an appropriate waste source has been identified. Cri-
teria to identify a suitable waste source are:
1. Substrate availability and costs: Is the material available in regular sufficient quantity
and quality and what are the costs (purchase, transport, separation)?
2. BSFL process performance: Is the material suitable as a food source for the larvae and to
what extent does this affect the time spent in the larveros until harvesting?
3. Product safety: Does the waste contain substances (pathogens, heavy metals, pesticides,
etc.) that could have a negative impact on the health of personnel and/or larvae or ulti-
mately affect the quality of the final product?
4. Waste recovery hierarchy: Does access to a specific waste source affect an existing waste
system? How has this waste been disposed of or used in the past and who benefited from
it (animal feed, biodigester)?
4.1.1
Biowaste pre-processing
A first step upon arrival of the waste involves a waste quality control to ensure that it contains no
hazardous materials and no inorganic substances. A few plastic bags in the waste may not pose
a significant problem and can be sorted and removed manually. However, it is critical to keep
Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing 39hazardous contaminants out of the waste as these may affect all the living organisms: the larvae,
associated bacteria and, of course, the workers. Acids, solvents, pesticides, detergents and heavy
metals fall into this category and it is especially critical to keep them out when they are in a liquid
or dissolved form, as this can easily contaminate the whole batch of waste material. If such con-
tamination is suspected, the waste should be refused.
Figure 4–1: Hammer mill for waste pre-processing
With the waste quality ensured, the next required step
then involves a reduction of the waste particle size.
This can be achieved by using a shredder or hammer
mill (Figure 4–1). Whatever type of technology is used,
the equipment should shred the waste to particles of
smaller than 1-2 cm in diameter. This helps speed-up
BSF processing as BSF larvae do not have appropriate
mouthparts to break apart large chunks of waste, and
increasing the surface area fosters the growth of the
associated bacteria. Efficient shredding of the waste
also increases the homogeneity of the residue, which
improves its quality and then later simplifies the separa-
tion of larvae and residual material.
Greenhouse gas emissions
Given the continuing efforts of nations and local governments towards reducing greenhouse
gas emissions, and the commitments taken by all states that are parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change, decision-makers increasingly evaluate the Glob-
al Warming Potential (GWP) of different treatment options when choosing biowaste man-
agement approaches. For the more conventional approaches such as composting or anaerobic
digestion this information is well established and simplified methodologies are available
under the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) framework. However for more recent tech-
nologies, such as BSF waste treatment, to-date such information is scarce. However first re-
sults indicate that gaseous emissions from the degradation process, such as carbon dioxide
(CO 2 ), methane (CH 4 ) and nitrous oxide (N 2 O), are not a concern in BSF treatment. The studies
show lower emissions compared to the other treatment methods 2,3 .
2
3
Ermolaev E, Lalander C and Vinnerås B. (2019) Greenhouse gas emissions from small-scale fly larvae composting
with Hermetia illucens. Waste Management 96: 65-74.
Mertenat A, Diener S and Zurbrügg C. (2019) Black Soldier Fly biowaste treatment – Assessment of global warm-
ing potential. Waste Management 84: 173-181.
Shredded waste with a water content above 80% (Figure 4–2) will need to be mixed together with
another, dryer waste source to obtain a resulting moisture content of the mixture below 80%. At
80% water content the shredded waste will have a consistency of a fruit mix (smoothie) from your
kitchen blender.
If the water content is below 70% (Figure 4–4), then water needs to be added. Suitable water con-
tent can be determined by squeezing a handful of substrate in your closed fist. If less than a few
drops of water emerge between your fingers, then the substrate is too dry. When moistening the
substrate with water, make sure the water is clean and not contaminated with pathogens, heavy
metals or other anti-nutritional elements. A substrate with a moisture content between 70 and
80% usually has a moist look but will firmly stay as a pile when added into the larvero unit (Figure
4–3)
40 Black Soldier Fly Biowaste ProcessingFigure 4–2: Biowaste with water Figure 4–3: Biowaste with water Figure 4–4: Biowaste with water
content >80% content 70-80% content <70%
When the organic waste is accepted at the facility, the weight should be measured. This al-
lows to keep record of the daily waste intake of the facility. The best moment to measure
the weight of the total incoming waste is after it has been shredded as then it is likely to be
temporarily stored in containers. If dewatering of waste is practiced, then weigh the waste
before and after the dewatering process.
4.1.2
BSF treatment unit
Waste treatment using larvae of the Black Soldier Fly can be conducted in many different ways.
Here we describe a batch wise treatment with manual harvesting. Using this approach, a defined
number of same-aged young larvae (5-DOL) are put in a container (incubator unit) with a defined
amount of substrate. While the 5-DOL feed and grow, the incubator unit becomes too small to
allow further growth and the larvae are then moved into a larger container (larvero unit) and more
substrate is added.
As a rule of thumb, we work with the following numbers: 10,000 larvae are fed with a total
of 12 kg of substrate (75% water content) and harvested after a total of 12 days. Initially the
10’000 5-DOL are kept in an incubator unit (30x20x10 cm) and left to feed on a single load of
1kg for 3 days, thereafter the larvae are transferred to a larvero unit (40x60x15cm) and left to
feed on a single load of 11 kg for 9 days.
We propose to use the combination of incubator units and larvero units as this has shown to
increase the amount of substrate that can be converted per unit of space available and also con-
tributes to reducing the number of handlings. This approach involves starting with a larger num-
ber of smaller incubator units which are operated for 3 days and each receive small amounts of
substrate. These smaller units allow easier handling without negatively affecting the growth of
the young 5-DOL. We observed that using this “incubator” approach reduces overall labour time
requirements and when harvesting at the end of the treatment process, the mixture of larvae and
residue is dry enough so that it can be easily sieved.
Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing 41For the second feeding, when the larger amount of substrate is added to the larvero units, two
approaches are possible. Either bring the substrate to the larvero units or else move the larvero
units to a central substrate feeding station. Installing a central substrate feeding station has the
advantage of keeping the large bulk of waste concentrated in one location therefore keep the
potentially filthy area in one spot (which can then be cleaned regularly) and avoiding movement of
loose bulk waste around the facility. An additional advantage is that when moving the larvero units
to the substrate feeding station each unit can be inspected and checked for irregularities. This
book describes the feeding system when using a central feeding station.
The origin of BSF waste treatment
BSF research started in the mid-20th century in chicken barns. It was observed that the pres-
ence of BSF larvae in the manure underneath the chicken cages reduced housefly breeding
and manure accumulation. Researchers, thus, started to put this new insight into practice
by planning BSF friendly manure pits (ramps for prepupa self-harvesting, access for cleaning
machinery and attached greenhouses for adults). Most of the attempts of taking BSF treat-
ment to a professional level have been established around a continuously fed system based
on prepupa self-harvesting. However, experience has shown that harvest losses and hygienic
challenges are very high in a continuous system, making it difficult to operate it in an eco-
nomically viable way.
As the larvae feed on the biowaste in the incubator and larvero unit, they will break down the
organic matter and metabolize the nutrients into larval biomass. If too much biowaste is fed to the
larvae, an unprocessed waste layer will build up and start to generate heat through its bacterial
activity. This heat build-up is unfavourable for the larvae. The unprocessed waste layer will also
attract vermin. On the other hand, if not enough waste is provided the larvae will starve and slow
their growth. As a result the facility will have a lower waste treatment capacity and also lower
yield of grown larvae. The amount of waste that can be fed per larvero unit is also limited by the
resulting layer thickness of waste in the larvero. If the layer thickness of the waste in the larvero
unit is thicker than 5cm, larvae will have difficulties to feed through this whole layer and the waste
at the lower part of the layer will remain unprocessed.
42 Black Soldier Fly Biowaste ProcessingThe table manners of the larvae
The morphology of the mouthparts suggest that the larvae of Hermetia illucens specialize
in liquid and small-grained foods. However, the larva also has a mechanism reminiscent of
modern tunnel boring machines with which it can reduce coarse material with moving discs
grinders going up and down four times per second and thus make larger particles accessible
for digestion 4,5 .
Following ingestion, the food passes through the food pipe into the midgut, the longest and
most important part of the larva digestive tract. Along the midgut, through the combined
action of the gut environment, enzymes, and microbes, the diet is broken down into smaller
molecules for absorption through the gut cells into the haemolymph, the “blood” of insects 6 .
Microbes in the biowaste and larval gut have multiple functions that are important for the
process performance. In the biowaste, microbes are important for the hydrolysis of biowaste
macronutrients, especially fibres that typically cannot be decomposed by BSF larvae. After
ingestion, some of these microbes are used by the larvae as food providing additional nutri-
ents to those found in the diet.
4
5
6
Shishkov O, Hu M, Johnson C, et al. (2019) Black soldier fly larvae feed by forming a fountain around food. Journal
of The Royal Society Interface 16.
Bruno D, Bonacci T, Reguzzoni M, et al. (2020) An in-depth description of head morphology and mouthparts in
larvae of the black soldier fly Hermetia illucens. Arthropod Structure & Development 58.
Gold M, Egger J, Scheidegger A, et al. (2020) Estimating black soldier fly larvae biowaste conversion performance
by simulation of midgut digestion. Waste Management 112.
Incubator and larvero units can be stacked upon each other to further reduce surface area require-
ments (Figure 4–5 and Figure 4–6). However, if stacked, it is suggested to keep enough open
space between the stacked treatment units to allow for aeration. The gap between the units is
necessary to secure air ventilation and to allow the moisture-saturated air above the units to be
replaced. Ventilation also provides oxygen, which is crucial for the well-being of the larvae.
For the incubator units, the single unit biowaste processing footprint is 33.3 kg/m 2 /d when stack-
ing six units on top of each other (Figure 4–5). For the larvero units, the single unit biowaste
processing footprint is 30.6 kg/m 2 /d when stacking six units on top of each other (Figure 4–6).
When combining the system which uses incubator units for the first 3 days of feeding biowaste
and stacking the units while the larvae are feeding, the combined biowaste conversion footprint
of this system is 31.25 kg of biowaste treated per m 2 per day.
Figure 4–5: Rack with incubator containers Figure 4–6: Stack of larveros with ventilation
(4 containers per crate) frames in-between levels
Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing 434.1.3
Product harvesting
After 12 days of waste treatment by BSF larvae, each larvero unit is harvested. At this stage, the
larvae have reached an age of 17 days and their maximum weight, but have not yet transformed
into pre-pupae. Their nutritional value is, therefore, at its maximum. If this ideal moment is after
12 days of treatment, or a few days less or more, depends strongly on external influences such
as the ambient temperature or the quality of the feed. Operators of a facility therefore need to
remain vigilant and observe the larvae and their growth and change to identify the ideal moment
of harvest specific to their local context and situation.
In the harvesting step, the two products larvae and residue need to be separated from each
other. Depending on the water content of the input material, the residue will show as a crumbly
dry mass or as a wet slurry. We do not recommend the wet slurry residue as the harvesting
process becomes quite cumbersome. Therefore we recommend to take measures during the
treatment step to ensure that the resulting residue will be a crumbly dry mass. When receiving
waste substrates that are high in water content that would likely result in a wet slurry residue, we
recommend adding a dry material such as cocopeat, palm kernel meal or milk powder during the
treatment stage so that the residue has dried out by the time the larvero units are harvested. Dry
crumbly residue can be harvested using a shaking sieve with two sieve layers, one with a mesh
size of 3 mm and one with a mesh size of 7 mm. Shaking sieves can be manual or automated.
Automated shaking sieves can achieve higher shaking frequencies than manual sieves and are,
therefore, favoured (Figure 4–7). Sieving the larvae residue mixture with two sieve layers will
result in a total of three fractions, one fraction of larvae and two fractions of residue (Figure 4–7).
The first fraction of residue which has a dark soil-like colour can be bagged and stored until the
material has matured and can then be used as a compost or soil amendment. The second fraction
of residue, which is typically made up of leaves, seeds and other residual material, should be
composted for a longer time, ideally using a windrow composting system.
To learn more about how to compost the BSF residue or in
general organic matter, a composting guide can be found
through this link
During the shaking of the sieve, the coarse parts of the
residue will remain on top of this first sieve layer with
a mesh size of 7 mm. The larvae and the fine parts of
the residue will fall through this first sieve layer onto
the second layer with a mesh size of 3 mm. The larvae
will remain on this sieve without falling through while
the fine residue will fall through the second sieve lay-
er. Given the inclination and the shaking of this type of
sieve, all fractions move down the slope to the end of
the sieve. Here, at each sieve layer level a funnel con-
nects to a bucket where the fractions are collected for
further processing. Other horizontal sieve systems use
a vibrator engine to guide the material towards a funnel
where it is collected in a bucket.
Figure 4–7: Shaking sieve to separate larvae from dry residue
44 Black Soldier Fly Biowaste ProcessingFigure 4–8: Three fractions of materials after sieving: 1 fraction of larvae and two fractions of residue
4.1.4
Conditioning of the harvested products
Harvesting separates the residue from the larvae. However, after completing the process some
residue particles will remain stuck to the larvae and the gut of the larvae will still contain material
which has not been excreted yet. Typically, the harvested BSF larvae are sold as animal feed
products either alive or in a post-processed form. For both cases conditioning of the larvae is
a requirement to increase the product purity and quality. Two ways of larvae conditioning are
suggested here, which both aim to clean the larvae from remaining residue particles and partly
reduce the larval gut content: purging and sanitising. While the purging operation cleans the live
larvae, the sanitising operation kills the larvae in a blanching step prior to cleaning. Nevertheless,
both described procedures do not necessarily fully free the larvae from microorganisms or any
contamination which was in the waste source and might be transmitted to the larvae during their
growth or contact with the waste substrate.
4.2
Activities in the BSFL conversion unit
In this subchapter, the process steps and the materials to use during these steps are presented.
As with the BSF rearing operations, most materials can be found in hardware stores but some
materials and equipment have been custom-made for the operation. The dimensions of these
items are provided in the description under the item.
The technical drawings for the custom-made materials and
equipment used in the operational steps of the BSFL conver-
sion unit can be found through this link
Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing 454.2.1
Pre-processing
The goal of the pre-processing step is to reduce particle size and homogenise the input material.
The waste can then easily be distributed and fed to the larvae and the nutrients are made easily
accessible to the larvae and the associated bacteria.
Materials and equipment needed:
Hammer-mill shredder
(Cap 1 ton/h) Bin
(80 L)
Dry matter/TS oven Dry matter analysis cup
Bulk scale
(max 150 kg, acc 50 g)
Mixer
(max cap 300 kg)
Tasks:
After a quality check and acceptance,
remove the organic waste from the
collection vehicle and place the waste
near the shredder. While emptying
the vehicle, remove non-organics con-
tained in the waste (rough sorting).
Step 2 : Place a labelled bucket under the shred-
der outlet and turn on the shredder.
Step 3: While filling the hopper to shred the
waste, manually remove non-organic
components in the waste. When the
waste receiving bucket is full, exchange
it with a labelled empty new bucket.
Step 1: Removing baskets with waste from the market.
Step 4: Weigh and document each full bucket
Baskets are checked one by one on content
of shredded waste using a bulk scale.
Step 5: After all waste is shredded, use the high-pressure washer to clean the inside, outside and around
the shredder. All the wastewater needs to be discharged for treatment.
Step 1:
46 Black Soldier Fly Biowaste ProcessingStep 6:
Step 7:
Step 8:
Step 3: Reducing particle size of biowaste by shredding Step 6 + 7: Conditioning of substrate by adding dry material if water
the material content is too high and adding water if water content is too low
If the waste substrate is still too moist (water content >80%) a dry bulk material has to be added
to balance the water content and allow for the residue to be dry by the end of the process. You can
mix the materials in with the substrate before feeding it into the conversion units using a mixer or
simply add the dry material to the crates first and then add the wet substrate on top.
If the substrate is too dry (water content <70), you can mix it in with a wet substrate or simply add
water. Ensure that the dry material is always on the bottom and the wet material on top in case
the material is not mixed before adding it into the larvero units.
To find out what the water content of a waste material is, a Total Solids (TS) sample has to be
prepared in a specifically designed oven. Normally these ovens are called ‘’dry matter ovens’’ or
‘’TS ovens’’.
PROTECTIVE MEASURES FOR WORKERS:
· Use gloves, protective clothing, eye and ear protection when using the shredder.
· Make use of the protective measures available for the shredder/hammer mill, i.e
feeding hopper, flap and other safety features, to avoid any risk of direct contact
between workers’ hands and moving parts.
POINTS OF MONITORING AND DATA COLLECTION:
· Weight of waste received
· Weight of separated fractions of waste for various destinations
· Before adding substrate to the larvero units, it is important to obtain substrate samples to
determine the moisture content. For this purpose, thoroughly mix the substrate in each
substrate holding container and place one large scoop from each substrate container into
a bucket. Mix the content in the sampling container thoroughly and remove one sample of
about 50g and place it onto a sample tray. The tray with the sample is weighed and then
dried in an oven at 105 °C for 24 hours before weighing the tray again. Calculate the water
content of the sample by: Water content [%] = (Wet weight-Dry weight)/Wet weight*100
Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing 47The pre-processing stage module from the e-learning
video series on BSF Biowaste Processing is available through
this link.
4.2.2
Treatment
A new batch of biowaste for processing each day is initiated by setting up incubator units, feeding
a defined amount of shredded (and conditioned) biowaste substrate into each of these incubator
units, and then preparing and adding a defined number of 5-DOL on top of the substrate. Each
incubator unit will receive 1kg of substrate and 10,000 5-DOL which results in a density of 3.3
larvae per cm 3 . Setting up larvero units involves preparing the empty larvero units by adding 11kg
of fresh substrate and the content of a 3-day old incubator unit. This results in a density of 0.8 lar-
vae per cm 3 . Layers of 6 larvero units are stacked on a palette alternating with ventilation frames.
Materials and equipment needed:
Incubator unit rack
(150 x 180 x 65 cm) Incubator unit
(30 x 20 x 10 cm) Larvero unit
(60 x 40 x 15) Larvero unit pallet
(129x122x20 cm)
Ventilation Frame
(129 x 122 x 12 cm) Biowaste conversion unit
(129 x 122 x 170 cm) Pallet trolley
(cap. 2 ton) Bin
(80 L)
Spade Bulk scale
(max 150 kg, acc 50 g) Trolley
48 Black Soldier Fly Biowaste ProcessingTasks:
Step 1:
Step 2:
Step 3:
Step 4:
Step 5:
Step 6:
Step 7:
Step 8:
Prepare 36 empty incubator units and fill each with 1 kg of substrate
Add one cup containing 10,000 5-DOL onto the substrate in each incubator unit
Step 1: Add 1 kg substrate to each Step 2: Add the portioned 5-DOL
incubator unit on top of the substrate
Step 3: Incubator units in crates
Add the 36 incubator units into larger crates and add these crates into the incubator rack
Take the oldest group of 36 incubator units from the incubator rack and place them near the feed-
ing station
Get a pallet and a pallet trolley. Prepare 36 larvero units and 5 open ventilation frames. Place these
close to the feeding station.
Place 6 larvero units on the pallet, feed them
with 9 kg of substrate each and empty one in-
cubator unit into one Larvero unit on top of the
fresh substrate. Place an open ventilation frame
over the six crates. Now stack the next layer of
six larvero units on the ventilation frame and re-
peat this process until a stack of six layers with
a total of 36 crates is complete.
Label the pallet with the pallet date code. Then,
use the pallet trolley to bring the pallet to its des-
tination in the building.
Wash the substrate holding containers which
have been emptied using a high-pressure wash-
er and leave to dry.
Step 6: Stacking of the larvero units on the pallets
Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing 49PROTECTIVE MEASURES FOR WORKERS:
· Use gloves and protective clothing during feeding activities
POINTS OF MONITORING AND DATA COLLECTION:
· Weight of substrate added to incubator units
· Weight of substrate added to larvero units
The treatment stage module from the e-learning video
series on BSF Biowaste Processing is available through this
link.
50 Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing4.2.3
Harvesting
After the larvae have fed on the substrate and only dry residue remains, the Larvero units are
harvested using a mechanical sieving system which allows for the mixture of residue and larvae
to be separated into three fractions. The larvae can then be removed and further processed. The
residue streams undergo further treatment before being applied to soils.
Materials and equipment needed:
Conveyor (custom made) and separation system (Guan-Yu, GY-1000-2S). Sieve with dimensions of
100 x 100 x 106 cm, 2HP dynamo with voltage of 380 (3-phase) and 1440 rpm
Bin
(80 L) Spade
Dry matter/TS oven Dry matter analysis cup
Bulk scale
(max 150 kg, acc 50 g)
Trolley
Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing 51Tasks:
Step 1:
Prepare the harvesting area by placing empty material bins under the outlets of the sieving ma-
chine and placing the bulk balance near the hopper of the conveyor belt.
Step 1: Harvesting station with sieving system, collection bins and residue bags
Step 2:
Step 3:
Step 4:
Select the pallet or pallets that will be harvested on this day, by checking the set-up/harvesting
schedule, and move it/them to the harvesting area using the pallet trolley
Turn on the bulk balance, conveyor belt and sieving machine
Take three empty conversion crates and tare their weight on the bulk balance. Then take the first
three larvero units with a mixture of residue and larvae from the pallet and place them on the bulk
balance. Note down the mass in the log sheet.
Step 4: Weighing crates from the biowaste conversion
unit on a scale
Step 5:
Step 6:
Step 7:
Empty the three larvero units one-by-one into the hopper so that the material gradually is transport-
ed into the top of the sieve by the conveyor.
Repeat the processes of weighing, noting down the weight and emptying the units until one pallet
is harvested. Then repeat the process for the other pallets that are scheduled to be harvested
today
While harvesting the pallets: ensure you keep each of the three output fractions separate for each
pallet to obtain harvesting yield per pallet. Switch bins with empty ones when full.
52 Black Soldier Fly Biowaste ProcessingStep 8:
Step 9:
One output fraction will have larger particles,
the content of this bin is weighed and noted
down and the material is composted. Another
output stream is the fine residue, the content
of this bin is weighed and noted down and the
material is bagged for maturing.
The third fraction are the larvae which are still
mixed with some residue with a particle size
similar to the size of the larvae. The residue is
removed by skimming it off (by hand) from the
top of the bin as larvae are pushing up the resi-
due to get away from the light. After no clusters
of residue can be observed, the bin with larvae
can be weighed and the weight noted down.
Step 7: Larvae and residue on transport belt before being
separated into the different fractions
PROTECTIVE MEASURES FOR WORKERS:
· Use gloves, eye protection and protective clothing during harvesting activities.
POINTS OF MONITORING AND DATA COLLECTION:
· It is critical to measure the weight of the “harvest” of the residue and the larvae. These
data are used to calculate performance indicators that allow the operator to monitor the
performance of the treatment facility, namely waste reduction, bioconversion ratio and
larval yield. For this purpose, we measure the net weight of the larvero content as well
as the larvae harvest. The difference between net larvero content and larvae harvest is
the weight of the residue. Furthermore, we analyse the residue with regard to its water
content.
· Document the weight of each larvero before emptying. Subtracting the weight of
the empty larvero container will result in the net weight of the larvero content.
· Document the total weight of harvested larvae.
· After harvesting the larvero units, it is important to obtain samples from the residue and
the larvae to determine the mass and moisture content. For this purpose, remove batch-
es from three random Larvero units and place the samples in cups. Put the sampling
bowl onto a plate and pick out all the larvae. Make sure to not spill the liquid as this is part
of the wet weight measurement.
Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing 53Once you take out all the larvae, put the residue into a sampling tray. Take 20 of the larvae and
dry them with a tissue before putting them onto a sampling tray. Repeat this three times for the
three samples. Put the rest of the larvae back to the harvested crates or directly on the harvesting
screen. Weigh the samples (larvae and residue) and dry them in an oven at 105 °C for 24 hours
before weighing each tray again. By doing this, you will obtain the water content of the larvae and
the residue. Calculate the water content of the sample by: Water content [%] = (Wet weight-Dry
weight)/Wet weight*100
Separating residue from larvae and taking random Triplet samples of substrate in, residue out and larvae
larvae for triples samples out are placed in the TS oven
The harvesting stage module from the e-learning video
series on BSF Biowaste Processing is available through this
link.
54 Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing4.2.4
Conditioning
Harvested BSF larvae should either be purged or sanitised, depending on the intended use of the
larvae.
Purging:
Purging starts with a washing step to remove the remaining residue attached to the larvae. Then
the washed larvae are left in a purging bed containing a dry material for a period of three to four
hours. During this time, larvae will start emptying their gut content. After purging, larvae are still
alive and therefore this process is good practice when selling live larvae.
Materials and equipment needed:
Bin for washing Washing net Plastic tube rack Water
Bulk scale
(max 150 kg, acc 50 g) Dry cocopeat Purging bed Sieve
(mesh size: 3 mm)
Tasks:
Step 1:
Step 2:
Step 3:
Step 4:
Prepare the washing bin. Place the plastic tube rack inside the waste bin. Place the washing net
inside the waste bin and fix it on the side.
Washing. Add 10 kg of freshly harvested larvae on the net. Wash the larvae with clean water until
all remaining dirt and residue is washed of. This may take 5 to 10 minutes.
Purging. Place the wet larvae on the purging bed. Add for every 10 kg of wet larvae 1 kg of dry
material, e.g cocopeat. Mix the cocopeat with the larvae and leave the larvae for three to four
hours.
After few hours you will see that the larvae have dried off and started to separate from the coco-
peat. Remove the remaining cocopeat by sieving the larvae.
Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing 55Step 1: Preparation of washing bin. Step 2: Washing of larvae
Step 3: Larvae in a purging bed. Step 4: Larvae separated from cocopeat.
PROTECTIVE MEASURES FOR WORKERS:
· Use gloves, eye protection and protective clothing during grinding activities.
On sanitising larvae
It is obvious that insect larvae fed with organic waste may pose a health risk when fed to live-
stock if they are left untreated. Thermal treatments such as boiling, roasting, (deep-)frying,
blanching and microwave treatment, even for short times, have proven to be very effective
to reduce the amount of vegetative bacteria and fungi. The application of heat to whole in-
sects after harvesting allows most microbial counts to be reduced to below detection limit.
However, it was also found that at least some of the bacterial endospores can survive a heat
treatment and thus it can lead to recontamination in the further process 7 . The traditional
processing techniques of solar drying seem to have little effect on the reduction of bacteria,
yeast and mould 8 . Therefore, regardless of the treatment method, care must be taken to min-
imise the risk of recontamination by maintaining a hygienic working environment during
further processing.
7
8
Vandeweyer D. (2018) Microbiological quality of raw edible insects and impact of processing and preservation. 197.
Nyangena D, Mutungi C, Imathiu S, et al. (2020) Effects of Traditional Processing Techniques on the Nutritional and
Microbiological Quality of Four Edible Insect Species Used for Food and Feed in East Africa. Foods 9: 574.
56 Black Soldier Fly Biowaste ProcessingSanitising:
For the sanitising step the larvae are dipped in boiling water (blanching) for 60 seconds. Blanching
kills the larvae quickly and as a reaction to the sudden increase in temperature – due to the dipping
in the boiling water - larvae empty part of their gut content. Thereafter the following washing step,
washes off remaining residue and gut content from the larvae. After this step, we recommend to
further process the larvae as fast as possible, as the dead larvae spoil quickly. Sanitising facilitates
subsequent drying, as larvae have thus already been killed and do not move around anymore dur-
ing the drying step. Moreover, the quicker the killing, the better for the animal and also for the end
product, as stress can negatively influence the product quality.
Materials and equipment needed:
Bin for washing Washing net Plastic tube rack
Pot for hot water Stove setup Dipping spoon
Water
Tasks:
Step 1:
Step 2:
Step 3:
Step 4:
Preparations. Heat up the water until you see bubbles rising or until it reaches a temperature of
90°C. In the meantime prepare the washing bin, by placing the plastic tube rack inside the bin and
fixing the washing net on top.
Sanitising. Fill the dipping spoon with freshly harvested larvae and dip them into the hot water for
around 60 seconds. Then transfer the larvae on to the prepared washing net. Repeat this step
until the washing net is full of larvae (approximately 10 kg). Exchange the dirty water with clean
water every 50 kg of larvae.
Washing. Clean the blanched larvae with clean water until the remaining residue is washed off.
Directly start post-processing the larvae, as in this state the larvae will decompose very fast. If
post-processing is not possible, store the sanitised larvae in the freezer.
Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing 57Step 1: Preparation of washing bin.
Step 2: Dipping of larvae in hot water.
PROTECTIVE MEASURES FOR WORKERS:
· Use gloves, eye protection and protective clothing.
The conditioning module from the e-learning video series
on BSF Biowaste Processing is available through this link.
58 Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing4.3
Work schedules, monitoring and data collection
The activities covered in this chapter all relate to the conversion of the biowaste using the Black
Soldier Fly Larvae. As with the rearing unit, the amount of handlings can make this system com-
plex to operate. A work schedule is available (see Annex C) which structures all the handlings in
a step-by-step way and thereby creates an organised overview of which steps have to be passed
through each day.
In the described operations as well as in the work schedule, there are moments when data needs
to be collected and recorded in order to create an overview of the rearing cycle performance.
The rearing operations used one log sheet for all operations in the rearing unit. However, as the
treatment unit is much larger and the different operations are quite far spread out over the site,
separate log sheets are prepared and placed at the different locations so that the operator can fill
out the data log sheets close to where the tasks are being conducted. The log sheets are available
in Annexes E and F. The log sheets allow recording of data on waste in, waste to treatment, waste
in units, larvae out and residue out of units and dry matter sample results. The way to collect this
data is explained in the respective stages in the chapters above.
Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing 5960 Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processin
ProcessingChapter 5:
BSFL post-processing and
Marketing
5.1
Marketable Products from BSFL Biowaste Conversion
Processing organic waste using BSFL results in two main outputs: Larvae (10-20% of the waste’s
wet weight) and frass (20-40%). The frass can be further processed by composting into soil-en-
hancing compost. Similarly, the larvae can be directly sold as fresh larvae or they can undergo
further processing into products like dried larvae (pop larvae), BSF meal, BSF oil or BSF pellets
(Figure 5–1). All of these products are potential revenue streams for a BSF biowaste conversion
facility.
Figure 5–1: BSFL waste conversion products. Conversion percentages describe the estimated yield from the pervious product.
Values are based on wet weight.
Another revenue stream could be from products of the BSF rearing unit, e.g. BSF eggs, 5-DOLs
or BSF pupae. BSF rearing products are interesting for other BSF facilities or BSF newcomers.
These are usually sold at low sales volumes due to the limited market opportunities but are
sold at high sales prices.
Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing 61The use of frass
In comparison to the application of maggots as animal feed, research around the use of
the frass is not so advanced. However, growth trials with various agricultural crops show
promising results when frass is used as a soil amendment. Whether as a soil conditioner,
substitute for synthetic fertilizer or to replace peat in horticulture, frass seems to be suitable
regardless of the initial feedstock and whether it underwent a composting process before ap-
plication or not 9,10,11 . The suitability of fresh frass has also been tested for biogas production
where results show that biomethane potentials similar to conventional substrates used in
anaerobic digestion, with slightly higher levels than expected from cattle manure but lower
than expected values from food waste 12 .
Studies show that frass can also be used as a substitute for the plant-based ingredients in
fish feed. Good growth rates were achieved in feeding trials with catfish or tilapia. The in-
itial feedstock is of course of great importance in this case. Use of frass in tilapia diets may
even prove beneficial by improving innate immune components and the resistance of tilapia
against bacterial infection 13 .
9
10
11
12
13
Menino R, Felizes F, Castelo-Branco M, et al. (2021) Agricultural value of Black Soldier Fly larvae frass as organic fertilizer on ryegrass. Heliyon
7: e05855.
Setti L, Francia E, Pulvirenti A, et al. (2019) Use of black soldier fly (Hermetia illucens (L.), Diptera: Stratiomyidae) larvae processing residue
in peat-based growing media. Waste Management 95: 278-288.
Beesigamukama D, Mochoge B, Korir NK, et al. (2020) Exploring Black Soldier Fly Frass as Novel Fertilizer for Improved Growth, Yield, and
Nitrogen Use Efficiency of Maize Under Field Conditions. Frontiers in Plant Science 11.
Elissen HJH, Hol S and van der Weide R. (2019) Methane production from insect, worm and mushroom waste streams and combinations.
Wageningen University & Research.
Yildirim Aksoy M, Eljack R, Schrimsher C, et al. (2020) Use of dietary frass from black soldier fly larvae, Hermetia illucens, in hybrid tilapia (Nile
x Mozambique, Oreocromis niloticus x O. mozambique) diets improves growth and resistance to bacterial diseases. Aquaculture Reports 17:
100373.
Marketing of BSFL products
One option is direct marketing of fresh larvae to customers. As the larvae will continue to develop
even after harvest and quickly turn into pre-pupae and pupae, immediate transport and feeding
is required. No additional processing costs are required. Thus the sales price is lower but may
include additional delivery costs. Potential clients are for example chicken or fish farmers that
are located in proximity of the BSF biowaste treatment facility. To have a steady income, a good
network and organisation with farmers is essential, so larvae are picked up (or delivered) on a daily
basis and losses are minimized.
Replacing up to 30% of commercial
chicken feed or up to 50% of commer-
cial catfish feed results in a similar or
better growth performance of the ani-
mals. Based on BSFL and commercial
feed prices in 2021, replacing com-
mercial feed with BSFL is cost saving.
For the details, check our fact sheets.
Chicken
Catfish
Post-processing facilitates storage and transport and hence, marketing activities of BSFL prod-
ucts. These benefits raise the sales prices of BSFL products and fluctuating demand can be buff-
ered. At the same time, post-processing raises the operational costs. Therefore, for a successful
business, selecting the right target market is crucial.
62 Black Soldier Fly Biowaste ProcessingIf your main revenue stream is from selling larvae, we recommend to perform a market assess-
ment before you start with your BSF business. Typically there are two main market directions: the
farmed animal feed and the pet food sector. It helps to investigate potential markets by performing
the following tasks:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
Define potential substitute products
Quantify the market size of these substitute products (sales volume in kg per month)
Quantify the market value of substitute products (sales volume in USD per month)
Check the price range of most popular products in the market
Check for regulations that apply for products
Potential substitute products are products which are similar to BSFL products such as other insect
based products or pellets containing soy or fishmeal, which could be replaced by BSF meal. De-
pending on the market environment, a lot of information can be found online. For more informal
markets, it can help to directly talk to retailers in the market.
We performed a market assessment for East Java, Indonesia,
where we were looking at the poultry and aquaculture feed
sector as well as the local pet food market. Methodology and
results are described in a detailed report.
Gate fee as an additional income
One source of possible income for organic waste treatment facilities in general and for BSF fa-
cilities in particular is by collection of a “treatment” fee. This is comparable to the tipping fee
at a landfill, where a fee is charged for accepting waste. Depending on the level of the fee, this
can have a strong impact on the competitiveness and financial viability of the BSF plant, as it
can subsidize production costs. Nevertheless, the quality of the delivered waste must still be
guaranteed and ensured in order to avoid significant contamination or the additional costs
of a necessary waste sorting step. The rates of such treatment fees or gate fees vary greatly
from region to region. Composting facilities in low- and middle income countries for example
charge between 5.– and 50.– USD/ton of waste they accept at the gate. Increased demand for a
particular waste material can also have a strong impact on prices. In Germany, gate fees have
fallen from 50.– USD/ton to zero in regions where some waste management sites compete for
organic waste.
A case study for Surabaya shows the market potential of var-
ious BSFL products in the pet food market. Find all details in
our factsheet.
Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing 63Various BSFL products have been tested on ornamental fish
and ornamental birds. Results indicate that BSFL products
can compete with conventional pet food products in terms of
quality and price. Find all details in our factsheet.
BSFL products
Based on the market study, several BSFL products may have the potential to create revenue. The
quality and use of BSFL products depends on the extent of further processing. Whereas fresh
larvae are not further processed, dried larvae require a drying step and BSF meal and oil require
a fractioning and refining step in addition to the drying step. Table 5–1 gives an overview of BSFL
products, post-processing steps required, application and quality parameters including water ac-
tivity, shelf life and nutritional parameters. Water activity is a measure for the free water in the
product that is available for microorganisms. A water activity lower than 0.6 inhibits growth of
any bacteria and yeasts. Low water activities and low fat contents prolong the shelf life of BSFL
products. BSFL mainly consist of proteins and fats, which is why only these nutritional parameters
are listed in the table. For protein and fat content a range is given, as these parameters depend
on the waste source used to feed the larvae. Especially the fat content can vary greatly between
20 and 40% in dried larvae, which then also has an effect on the protein percentage of the dried
larvae. Fresh larvae and dried larvae can be applied directly as feed products, whereas BSF meal
and BSF oil are ingredients for, for example, feed pellets.
Table 5–1: Overview of BSFL products
Product Fresh larvae Dried larvae BSF meal BSF oil
Process None Drying Drying + Fractioning Drying + Fractioning
Protein %* 6 – 10 30 – 40 50 – 65 0
Fat %* 6 – 10 20 – 40 8 – 15 100
Water activity 0.9 0.4 0.3 -
Expected shelf life 1– 2 days 4 month 6 month 2 month
Transport/Storage Open box Sealed packaging Sealed packaging Sealed packaging
Application Direct feed Direct feed Raw material Raw material
* values are based on wet weight
64 Black Soldier Fly Biowaste ProcessingDrying
Removal of water and thereby reducing water activity to 0.4 (which is well below the upper limit
of 0.6 as mentioned above) inhibits microbial and enzymatic activity and makes the product stor-
able for up to 4 months. By evaporation of water, the remaining nutrients in the product become
more concentrated, which means dried larvae have a higher protein content per sellable weight
compared to fresh larvae.
Dried larvae can be sold directly as a feed product. Visual aspect of dried larvae is one key aspect
that can determine its market value, especially for the pet food market. Characteristic colour,
texture and shape of dried larvae depend on the drying technique applied. Here, four different
drying methods are introduced, which can be categorized into rapid and slow drying. During rapid
drying, the water within the larvae evaporates quickly, which leads to a pressure build-up within
the larvae and ultimately to an instantaneous pressure release resulting in puffed and crispy lar-
vae or so called “pop-larvae”. Microwave drying or roasting are rapid dehydration methods and
result in pop-larvae. Roasted larvae typically show a darker colour (see Figure 5–2). The darker
colour results from heat induced reactions in the roasting process which include colour chang-
es. In contrast, microwaving is gentler and only minimal heat induced reactions take place and
pop-larvae maintain a pale yellow colour. During slow dehydration processes like oven drying, the
water evaporates slowly and the larvae shells shrink steadily until a constant weight is reached.
The product is less voluminous, and its texture is hard and stiff (see Figure 5–2). The more bulky
and voluminous product obtained by rapid dehydration has proved to look more appealing to most
customers and thus has a higher market value.
Microwaved BSFL
Roasted BSFL
Oven dried BSFL
Figure 5–2: Dried larvae products
Besides the different visual appearance of the dried products, drying methods are also distin-
guishable in terms of process parameters, which are listed in Table 5–2. Microwave heating re-
quires an electricity connection but is an energy efficient and simple process. Here we describe
the process of microwave heating using a simple kitchen microwave, which is good for small scale
applications as it requires minimal investment and space. However, also industrial microwaves
are available, which require a larger investment but allows processing of larger batches. Similar
to coffee beans or nuts, BSFL can be roasted in a drum dryer. A drum dryer is fitted with a well
heat insulated drum, an exhaust-fan, a fin structure inside the drum to flip the larvae as well as
an efficient burner to heat the drum from the bottom. A small-scale alternative to a drum dryer is
sand roasting in a wide wok pan, similar to the widely used sand-roasting technique of street food
vendors in Asian and Sub-Saharan countries making value-added snacks from cereals or nuts. The
sand prevents burning and facilitates even heating as it functions as a heat transfer medium. Com-
pared to roasting in a drum, energy usage is less efficient when roasting in open wok pan. When
using an oven, larvae are slowly dehydrated at 65°C. This rather low temperature drying prevents
the loss of valuable nutrients and avoids baking or burning of the larvae. A benefit of oven drying
is its passive operation, which reduces labour requirements.
Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing 65Table 5–2: Process related parameters of different drying methods
Parameter Microwave
drying Roasting
(drum) Roasting
(pan) Oven
drying
Energy source Electricity Gas Gas Gas
Heat medium Electromagnetic waves Hot air Sand Hot air
Material temperature Max. 180°C Max. 140°C Max. 180°C Max. 65°C
Batch size 0.25 kg 5 kg 1 kg 30 kg
Drying time 15 minutes 40 minutes 20 minutes 24 hours
Throughput 1.0 kg/h 7.5 kg/h 3.0 kg/h 1.3 kg/h
Space usage 0.4 m 2.5 m 0.4 m 2 m 2
Energy usage/kg dried larvae * 3.7 kWh
2
2
8.2 kWh
2
12.2 kWh
10.9 kWh
* Energy usage is presented as kWh. 1 kg gas equals 13.6 kWh.
Fractioning and refining
The high fat content of dried larvae may be unfavourable, since standardized animal feeds usually
require a fat content below 10%. Moreover, a high fat content makes the product more suscepti-
ble to lipid oxidation, which can result in unpleasant flavours and textures. Also, further processing
of dried BSFL into pellets or other processed products may be difficult, as high amounts of fat can
cause smearing and blocking of machines. The fat in the dried larvae can be extracted mechanical-
ly using a screw press typically used for nuts and seeds. This process is called fractioning, as the
larvae are split into a protein fraction (BSF meal) and fat fraction (BSF oil). In a first step, the screw
press squeezes the fat out of the larvae and produces a press cake and a press liquid. A second
refining step then yields BSF meal from the press cake and BSF oil from the press liquid. Because
of its high protein content, BSF meal is a potential substitute for fish meal or soybean meal. BSF
oil contains valuable fatty acids and can be a potential alternative for coconut or palm kernel oil.
Fractioning further enhances the shelf life of the BSF meal by up to 6 months. Both BSF meal
and BSF oil are raw materials, which can be used for different end-products and can be further
processed via pelletizing or saponification.
Wet-processing is when BSFL are pressed without prior dry-
ing, using a nut screw press. Find details for this process in
our factsheet.
66 Black Soldier Fly Biowaste ProcessingFor feed formulation with BSF meal, it is especially the protein quality that is important to consid-
er. The protein quality depends on the amino acid content. Amino acids are the building blocks
of proteins and each animal requires specific amounts of certain amino acids in their feed for a
healthy development. Protein sources such as fish meal or soybean meal have different amino
acid contents than the amino acid profile of BSF meal. When formulating feed using BSF meal it
helps to analyse amino acid contents and compare it to commonly used protein sources like fish
meal.
The quality and application of BSF oil depends on its fatty acid composition, as each type of oil
consists of different fatty acids. BSF oil typically contains high amounts of lauric acid, which
makes it comparable to palm kernel oil or coconut oil. The fatty acid composition is influenced by
the waste source used to feed the larvae. These differences in fatty acid composition can become
visible in the oil consistency. Thus, BSF oil may be in solid or liquid form at room temperature
depending on the fatty acid composition.
An example of an amino acid and fatty acid analysis and how
they compare to other protein sources, and other oils respec-
tively, are described in our factsheet.
Due to the similarities of BSF oil to coconut oil, it could be
used as an ingredient to make a soap bar. Find all the details
on how to make a soap bar in our factsheet.
5.2
Activities in the post-processing unit
Figure 5–3 illustrates the flow diagram of the post-processing options and the mass balances
for each processing step. Sanitised larvae contain around 75% water and protein and fat account
each for around 10% of the wet weight. In the drying step, the water is evaporated, which results
in a mass reduction of around 70%. Remaining nutrients become more concentrated resulting in
a protein content between 30 and 40% and a fat content between 20 and 40% of dry weight. By
fractioning, the dried larvae are pressed into a press cake (around 70%) and crude BSF oil (around
20%). During hot pressing some remaining water evaporates (around 10%). The press cake is then
grinded to a fine meal. During this refining step the mass balance does not change, as only the
particle size is reduced. Refining of BSF crude oil further reduces the oil mass by 40%, as solids
in the oil are filtered out. Each of the processing steps are further explained in detail within this
chapter.
Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing 67Figure 5–3: Process flow diagram and mass balance of post-processing BSF larvae.
68 Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing5.2.1
Microwave Drying
We illustrate the microwaving operation with a simple kitchen microwave. However, the same
principles as described here are also applicable for larger scale microwaves.
Materials and equipment needed:
Microwave
32 L, 1000 W
Capacity: 1 kg/h Ceramic
plate
Storage
container Flipping
spoon
Bulk balance
Max. capacity: 35 kg
Accuracy: ± 0.5 g
Heat resistant
gloves
Tasks:
Step 1:
Weigh 250 g of sanitized BSFL on to a ceramic microwave save plate and distribute the larvae
evenly.
Step 1: Larvae evenly distributed on the plate.
Step 2: Timer set to 5 min.
Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing 69Step 2:
Step 3:
Step 4:
Place the plate into the microwave and start to dry in 3 cycles of 5 minutes - at the highest power
(1000 Watt). In between each 5 minute cycle open the microwave for 30 seconds, let the steam
escape and flip the larvae with the flipping spoon. Too much steam in the microwave can cause
damp and moist larvae, and also drying takes longer if you do not let the steam out. During the last
cycle you will hear the typical «popping» sound.
Check if the product quality matches the following 2 indicators:
· Indicator 1: the larvae have a puffed shape
· Indicator 2: the larvae have a crispy and dry texture. When you crush the larvae with your
fingers, it breaks easily apart into fine crumbles.
If these indicators are not met, and your larvae are still moist or damp just re-start the microwave
for an additional cycle of 2-3 minutes – at highest power. When both indicators are achieved, re-
move larvae from the microwave.
Weigh the dried larvae of each batch and note down the weight in the log sheet (see Annex F).
Let the pop-larvae cool before you store them in a closed container. Label the container with the
production date.
Step 3: Checking the larvae texture.
Step 4: Weighing and storing the dried larvae.
PROTECTIVE MEASURES FOR WORKERS:
· Use gloves, eye protection and protective clothing during microwaving activities.
POINTS OF MONITORING AND DATA COLLECTION:
· Measure the weight of the larvae per batch before and after drying and note it down on the
log sheet.
The microwave drying module from the e-learning video
series on BSF Biowaste Processing is available through this
link.
70 Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing5.2.2
Roasting
The roasting operation is described based on a coffee roasting machine produced in Surabaya, In-
donesia. The process will work similarly for other rotating dryers. When buying or building a drum
dryer it is important that the machine is fitted with a good heat insulated drum, an exhaust-fan, a
fin structure inside the drum to flip the larvae as well as an efficient burner.
Materials and equipment needed:
Coffee Roaster
Motor: 350 W
Exhaust fan: 700 W
Drum volume: 0.46 m 3
Capacity: 7.5 kg/h Gas
cylinder
Container
(60 x 40 x 12 cm) Storage
container
Heat resistant
gloves
Bulk scale
Max. capacity: 150 kg
Accuracy: ± 50 g
Tasks:
Step 1:
Step 2:
Get the drum dryer ready for operation. For that, attach the gas cylinder to the burner of the drum
dryer and connect the machine to electricity. Switch on the control panel of the machine and start
the rotation, the exhaust fan and the heating. Set the temperature to 140°C, and preheat the drum
while it is rotating and the exhaust fan is on.
As soon as the temperature has reached 140°C, add 5 kg of larvae to the drum via the inlet funnel.
Let the larvae roast for approximately 40 minutes in total. You will notice that the temperature will
drop at the beginning to around 80-90°C. As more and more water then evaporates, the temper-
ature will start to rise again – this is when the actual roasting process starts. You can check the
process, by removing a sample from time to time.
Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing 71Step 2: Adding larvae to the
Step 3: Emptying drum via front flap door.
drum via funnel.
Step 3:
Step 4:
Stop the process when the following two indicators are met:
· Indicator 1: the larvae need to have a puffed shape
· Indicator 2: the larvae need to have a crispy and dry texture. When you crush the larvae with
your fingers, it breaks easily apart into fine crumbles
These indicators are usually met after the dryer has been operating for 5-10 min after the temper-
ature has reached 140°C again. Remove the larvae from the dryer by opening the front flap door.
Weigh the dried larvae per batch and note down the weight on the log sheet. Let the pop-larvae
cool before you store them in a closed container. Label the container with the production date.
The drum roasting module from the e-learning video
series on BSF Biowaste Processing is available through this
link.
A small scale alternative to drum roasting, which also considers very limited resources available,
is the sand roasting technique using a wok pan. The ideal sand for this method is washed beach
sand with a particle size from 0.8-1.5 mm. We recommend changing the sand after 5 cycles of
drying. Burned and dark sand results in burned and dark larvae.
72 Black Soldier Fly Biowaste ProcessingMaterials and equipment needed:
Wok pan setup
Diameter pan: 30 cm
Capacity: 3 kg/h Mesh spatula Spatula Heat resistant
gloves
Storage
container Washed beach sand
Particle size: 0.8 -1.5 mm Bulk balance
Max. capacity: 35 kg
Accuracy: ± 0.5 g Lighter
Tasks:
Step 1:
Step 2:
Add 1 kg of sand to the wok pan, turn on the gas stove and pre-heat the sand for 15 min.
Add 1 kg sanitised BSFL to the sand and roast the larvae for 15 to 20 minutes while you are contin-
uously stirring. During the last 5 minutes you will see the larvae puff and you will hear the typical
popping sound. You will notice the end of the process when the «popping sound» is less frequent.
Step 1: Preheating 1 kg sand in a wok pan.
Step 3:
Step 2: Adding 1 kg of BSFL to the hot sand.
Stop the process when the following two indicators are met:
· Indicator 1: the larvae need to have a puffed shape
· Indicator 2: the larvae need to have a crispy and dry texture. When you crush the larvae with
your fingers, it breaks easily apart into fine crumbles
If these indicators are not met and your larvae are still moist or damp, continue stirring and roasting
Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing 73Step 4:
Remove the larvae from the pan using the mesh spatula and weigh the dried larvae per batch
and note down the weight in log sheet. Let the pop-larvae cool before you store them in a closed
container. Label the container with the production date.
Step 4: Removing dried larvae from wok pan using a mesh
spatula. Shaking the mesh spatula removes sand attached
to the larvae.
PROTECTIVE MEASURES FOR WORKERS:
· Use oven gloves, eye protection and protective clothing during roasting activities.
POINTS OF MONITORING AND DATA COLLECTION:
· Measure the weight of the larvae per batch before and after drying and note it down on the
log sheet.
The sand roasting module from the e-learning video
series on BSF Biowaste Processing is available through
this link.
74 Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing5.2.3
Oven Drying
In a simple gas heated oven, as shown here, air circulation is not enough to ensure even heat
distribution for drying. Therefore, it is important to shuffle trays inside the oven as this helps to
ensure even drying. Typically, BSFL on the trays close to the bottom and top dry faster than on the
trays in the middle. Therefore, shuffle the trays from top or bottom towards the centre of the oven.
Ideally it would be even better to install a fan inside the oven, which ensures even heat distribution
throughout all areas inside the oven.
Materials and equipment needed:
Oven with thermostat
Thermostat: TGW IL-80EM
Heating: Stove (RI 511A)
Capacity: 1.3 kg/h Bulk scale
Max. capacity: 150 kg
Accuracy: ± 50 g
Heat resistant
gloves Storage
container
Mesh trays
Mesh size: 4 mm
Dimensions: 65 x 45 x 3.5 mm
Gas
cylinder
Tasks:
Step 1:
Step 2:
Start the oven by connecting the gas cylinder to the stove of the oven, start heating the oven and
set the thermostat to 65°C.
Add 3 kg of sanitized larvae to each of the 10 mesh trays and insert them into the pre-heated oven.
The larvae are dried during one first and long night session of 16 hours, a morning session of 4
hours and a last afternoon session of 4 hours. In between these three sessions trays are shuffled.
Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing 75Step 1: Setting the thermostat to 65°C.
Step 3:
Step 4:
Step 2: Adding the mesh trays with sanitised BSFL to the oven.
Stop the process after 24 hours of drying and check if the following indicators are met:
· larvae have a hard and dry texture
· larvae have a flat and shrunken shape
Weigh the dried larvae per batch (sum of all trays) and note down the weight in the log sheet. Let
the larvae cool before you store them in a closed container. Label the container with the produc-
tion date.
PROTECTIVE MEASURES FOR WORKERS:
· Use oven gloves, eye protection and protective clothing during oven drying activities.
POINTS OF MONITORING AND DATA COLLECTION:
· Measure the weight of the larvae per batch (sum of all trays) before and after drying and
note it down on the log sheet.
The oven drying module from the e-learning video series
on BSF Biowaste Processing is available through this link.
76 Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing5.2.4
Fractioning
The fat of the dried larvae can be extracted mechanically using a screw press. This results in a
BSF press cake and BSF crude oil. The BSF press cake is a dry but rough material high in protein.
The BSF crude oil is called “crude” because besides the fat it also contains solids, which mainly
consist of proteins and fibres.
Materials and equipment needed:
Screw press
Model: Vevor DL-ZYJ10B
Capacity: 5 kg/h Container for
press cake
Plastic box: 55 x 35 x 12 mm
Allen key Bulk balance
Max. capacity: 35 kg
Accuracy: ± 0.5 g
Container for
press liquid
5 L, stainless steel
Sieve
Mesh size: 0.5 mm,
Stainless steel
Tasks:
Step 1:
Step 2:
Step 3:
Prepare the screw press for operation. Turn on the screw press and heat it up to 100°C and place
the containers under the respective openings: the container for collecting the press cake under
the big outlet of the press, the oil collecting container under the small crevice openings at the
screw outlet. Place a sieve on top of the oil collection container. Start the screw turning by press-
ing the squeeze button.
Weigh the dried larvae you are planning to press using a bulk balance. Add larvae to the hopper,
little by little. Avoiding overloading the hopper prevents blocking of the screw press and therefore
increases the throughput per hour.
After all larvae have been added to the hopper, wait a few more minutes until no press cake and
no liquid is exiting the machine and then stop the screw (pressing the stop button). Empty the
remaining material from the press by reversing the screw turning direction (cleaning button).
Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing 77Step 1: Setup of screw press.
Step 4:
Step 5:
Step 2: Adding little by little dried Step 3: Wait until no press cake is coming
larvae to the hopper. out anymore.
Weigh the obtained press cake and weigh the press liquid and note it down on the log sheet.
Proceed directly with the refining step or else store the press cake and press liquid (crude oil)
temporarily in suitable closed containers. Label the containers with the production date.
We recommend a cleaning step after each use of the screw press, as this ensures product quality
and safety, avoiding remains of an older pressing contaminating a new batch. Regular cleaning
after each batch also prolongs the life time of the equipment. For cleaning, wait until the machine
has cooled down and then simply loosen and remove the screws in the tube using an Allen key,
and clean all parts with water and detergent.
PROTECTIVE MEASURES FOR WORKERS:
· Use oven gloves, eye protection and protective clothing during oven drying activities.
POINTS OF MONITORING AND DATA COLLECTION:
· Measure the weight of the dried larvae per batch before pressing and measure the weight
of press cake and BSF crude oil after pressing the whole batch. Note down the weights in
the log sheet.
The fractioning module from the e-learning video series
on BSF Biowaste Processing is available through this link.
78 Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing5.2.5
Refining
Both products from fractioning, the BSF press cake and the BSF crude oil should be further re-
fined. The BSF press cake needs a grinding step to reduce its particle size. As the BSF crude oil
contains solids, it should be further refined by filtering or decanting to increase its purity.
Grinding
To ensure a fine and homogenous particle size of the BSFL protein meal, the dry press cake has to
be grinded to a mesh size of 100 to 200 μm. Dry press cake has a rough texture, but if you intend
to use extruders and pelletizers these require a fine input material. That is why the grinding step
is an essential refining step to obtain a high quality raw material.
Materials and equipment needed:
Coffee grinder
Motor: 350 W
Exhaust fan: 700 W
Dust collecting
fabrics
Container for
press cake
Plastic box: 55 x 35 x 12 mm
Storage
container
Bulk balance
Max. capacity: 35 kg
Accuracy: ± 0.5 g
Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing 79Tasks:
Step 1:
Prepare the grinder for operation. Place containers under the two outlets of the grinder: The main
outlet and the exhaust outlet. Cover the two outlets with a fabric bag and start the grinder.
Step 1: Grinder setup.
Step 2: Adding of press cake to the
Step 3: BSF meal collection
grinder.
Step 2 : Continuously add dry press cake to the hopper until all press cake has been grinded.
Step 3: Stop the grinder and remove the fabric bag from the grinder.
Step 4: Weigh the BSF meal and note it down on the log sheet. Store the meal in a closed container and
label it with the production date.
PROTECTIVE MEASURES FOR WORKERS:
· Use gloves, eye protection and protective clothing during grinding activities.
POINTS OF MONITORING AND DATA COLLECTION:
· Measure the weight of BSF meal.
80 Black Soldier Fly Biowaste ProcessingOil refining
Solids can account for up to 40% of the total BSF crude oil mass. The solids consist mainly of
fibres and protein and can be separated from the BSF oil by a filtration or decanting step. As BSF
oil can be solid at room temperature, refining should be performed directly after pressing, when
the crude oil is still warm. If the oil is solid then it is not possible to use filtration or decanting for
separation. You would then need to heat the oil slightly so that is becomes liquid. The oil refining
process is important when you want to include the BSF oil in other products like BSF pellets, or
also BSF soap.
A) Oil filtering
Filtration recovers all solids whereby oil passes through a filter. A simple and passive setup using
e.g. coffee filters can separate the solids from the oil. The filtration process can be supported by a
vacuum pump, which can increase the filtration speed. Filtration is a slow process, which can take
up to 15 hours per kg crude BSF oil. Therefore, filtration is only recommended for small batches.
For larger batches the oil might become solid after a while, which then stops the filtration process.
Materials and equipment needed:
Coffee filter Plastic funnel Oil storage container
Light tight
Filter paper
Pore size 120 μm Erlenmeyer Buchner funnel
Vaccum pump
Cast DOA-P504-BN
Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing 81Tasks:
Step 1:
Prepare the filtration setup using a vacuum pump by placing the funnel on top of the Erlenmeyer
and connect it via tube to the vacuum pump. Place a fresh filter paper on top of the funnel and turn
on the vacuum pump.
Step 1: Vacuum pump setup.
Step 2:
Step 3:
Step 4:
Step 2: Pouring of BSF oil on top of the filter.
Pour the crude BSF oil into the funnel and let the crude oil filter through.
Stop the vacuum pump and collect the refined BSF oil. Discard the filter paper and the filtered
solid residue. Note down the weight of the oil collected.
Store the BSF oil in a light tight container and label it with the production date.
If you do not have a vacuum pump set up:
→
Adaptation step 1:
Use a coffee filter instead of filter paper. Place
the funnel on top of any kind of container and let
the fat passively filter through the coffee filter
by gravity.
B) Oil decanting
If you have larger quantities of crude BSF oil,
filtering is not feasible. If you do not have access
to more sophisticated equipment like an oil de-
canter centrifuge, you can also use the simple
method of decanting. With time the solids will
settle as sediment at the bottom of the crude
oil container. The BSF oil can then be separated
from the solids by decanting. The oil is collect-
ed by inserting a tube into the oil fraction at the
top of the container. After an initial suction with
the aid of a syringe the oil automatically flows
through the tube into the second collection con-
Adaptation step 1: Simple setup using a
tainer. This process is quicker compared to fil-
coffee filter and funnel.
tration. However, suspended solids that do not
settle to the bottom will not be separated using this method, therefore resulting in a less pure
product.
82 Black Soldier Fly Biowaste ProcessingMaterials and equipment needed:
Plastic syringe
Plastic tube
Oil storage container
Light tight
Cylindrical
container
Tasks:
Step 1:
Step 2:
Oil preparation. Leave the crude oil for a few hours in a cylindrical container. If your crude oil gets
hard, place the container in a warm water bath. The solids are heavier than the oil, therefore they
will settle at the bottom of container and you can decant the oil on top. Make sure you handle the
container with care in order to prevent settled solids from being suspended again.
Setup preparation. Place the cylindrical container on top of an empty box or container, so it’s on a
higher level compared to the storage container. Attach the syringe to one end of the plastic tube.
Insert the other end of the plastic tube into the upper oil fraction.
Step 3: Pulling the syringe to start the decanting process.
Step 3:
Step 4:
Start decanting by pulling the syringe so the oil is sucked from the crude oil container. Remove
the syringe and let the oil flow into the lower storage container by gravity. Make sure the tube is
constantly immersed in the top oil fraction and does not suck up the solids at the bottom of the
container.
Stop the process as soon as the tube touches the solids at the bottom of the container.
Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing 83PROTECTIVE MEASURES FOR WORKERS:
· Use gloves, eye protection and protective clothing during oil refining activities.
POINTS OF MONITORING AND DATA COLLECTION:
· Measure the weight of collected refined BSF oil. .
The refining module from the e-learning video series on
BSF Biowaste Processing is available through this link.
5.3
Monitoring, Storage and Product Labelling
Monitoring
To keep track of your post-processing activities we recommend filling a log sheet on each produc-
tion day. A template log sheet can be found in the Appendix H. The data recorded in the log sheet
allows checking on process control parameters. The mass balance is an important process control
parameter, as it gives an indication if the process is completed. A simple way to check the mass
balance is to calculate the output yield by dividing output mass by input mass:
Total mass OUT
Yield %
x 100
=
Total mass IN
With this percentage, you can control your drying or fractioning process, as the yield remains con-
stant within a range. However, the waste source and harvesting time point will have an influence
on the yields, as water and fat contents vary. Average values calculated at a pilot site are noted in
the mass flow diagram in Figure 5–3.
Storage
Spoilage of BSFL products is influenced by various factors which include temperature, humidity,
water activity, oxygen and light exposure. High temperature and humidity can lead to an increase
in water activity and hence, to spoilage through microorganism activity. However, the initial con-
84 Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processingtamination with microorganisms in the BSFL product will depend on the waste source as well as
cleaning and drying processes applied to the BSFL. Light and oxygen exposure can promote lipid
oxidation, which results in off-flavours, colour and form changes.
Choosing the right storage container and packaging helps to avoid rapid spoilage of BSFL prod-
ucts. Storage containers should be air and light tight as well as water proof. Similarly, packaging
material should be water proof and for high fat products like BSF oil or dried BSFL they should
also be light tight. Adding pre-packed desiccants to packed products sustains a low humidity level
inside the package and thereby keeps the water activity low. All products should be sealed before
selling as a guarantee for the customer that the product was not opened before. All products
should be stored in a place protected from high temperatures, weather and direct sun light.
Labelling
Your final packed BSF product requires a label, which holds relevant product information, is able
to ensure traceability and invites customers to buy your product. Figure 5–4 shows an example of
a product label designed for the microwave dried BSFL, called pop-larvae.
1
6
3
2
7
8
5
9
4
Figure 5–4: Example label for microwave dried BSFL, called pop-larvae
The different information shown in the example label above are listed and explained in Table 5–3.
Table 5–3: Items to add to a product label
# Labelling info
Description
1 Nutritional content Include at least protein, fat and water content.
2 Production date Important for traceability of your products
2 Expiry date This is important usage information and helps to
avoid complaints.
3 Product description e.g dried BSF larvae or BSF meal, your brand name
(pop-larvae) may be unclear
4 Netto weight Amount of product per pack
5 Pictures of target animals To visually indicate the intended use of the product.
6 General information / benefits This can help to catch interest of customers.
7 Usage instructions Indicate how to feed the animals with the product.
8 Storage instructions Mention where and how to store the product.
9 Company / brand name and address Information where customers can find you.
This could be a website, social media or a location.
Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing 8586 Black Soldier Fly Biowaste ProcessinChapter 6:
Business development
A business model for your BSF facility should be in place before starting your venture especially if
the intention is to run it as a business. This chapter provides some tools to support your business
model with numbers and to help identify what preconditions must be met before opening a BSF
facility.
6.1
Cost-revenue analysis and financial viability
Understanding and assessing the cost of BSF waste processing is an important aspect before
starting or while operating a BSF facility. This involves not only estimating the capital costs re-
quired for construction but also appraising the expected operational costs for a specific local
context and monitoring cost units during operations. Here we present two tools to help with
cost-revenue assessments and allow judgement on the financial viability of a BSF biowaste pro-
cessing facility.
The “scenario based business model tool” is for those that want to look at a BSF facility in detail.
It dissects each processing unit individually in terms of capital and operational cost. It provides
material lists required but also allows for individual adjustments if the user has experience and is
familiar with the specific local conditions at the location of interest. Analysis of each processing
unit separately allows to appraise different business models, for instance different degrees of de-
centralization and management of supply chains. After choosing a desired scenario, and entering
other input variables, the tool then calculates key financial parameters such as Net Present Value
(NPV), to determine the value of such a potential investment project.
Another tool is the “web-based cost model tool”, that provides a much more simple overview of
the costs involved in developing a BSF facility, based on the amount and type of waste conceived.
The tool utilizes data from the existing site and design in Indonesia, and provides default process-
ing conversions values, to calculate costs of capital expenditure and cost of production per unit.
The user then can assess the local market and potential sales prices of BSF products to judge if
a profit margin is possible.
Assessing potential revenue flows derived from BSF waste processing and comparing these to
cost items of a BSF facility, depending on scale of operation, gives a good indication if financial
viability might be achieved. Although experience and data from existing facilities can give a good
indication of space, equipment and labour requirements there are nevertheless variables that will
affect this data which depend very much on the local specific context and conditions:
· CAPEX or capital costs of the facility (e.g. local cost for constructing custom-made materials,
local availability of equipment, etc.
· OPEX or operational cost of the facility (e.g. local utilities cost, local labour wages, etc.)
· Climate and other environmental impacts (e.g. temperature, humidity, odour prevention, waste
water management, etc.)
· Potential revenues from waste processing (gate fees)
· Potential sales revenue from larvae derived products (e.g. whole larvae, dried BSFL, BSF meal
and BSF oil)
· Sales revenue from BSF rearing products such as 5-DOL sold for the use of converting waste
at other locations
· Sales of the waste residue as soil amendment or sales of related products such as biogas from
treating residue.
Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing 876.2
The scenario-based business model tool
The scenario-based business model tool was developed to differentiate each processing unit of
the facility based on “Activity Based Costing”. This allows the user to compare different scenarios
of business models and implementation. Three distinct scenarios are made available in the tool
which are described by the following figures below:
· Scenario 1: This scenario assumes one full-fledged centralised plant which includes all pro-
cessing units at one location. This central BSF facility, receives organic waste, processes this
waste with BSF to obtain grown larvae and then converts (post-processing) these larvae into
BSFL products such as fresh larvae, dried larvae and/or larvae meal and oil. This same facility
also runs a rearing unit that closes the lifecycle to ensure pupae, flies and eggs and continuous-
ly provides 5-DOL for the treatment unit (Figure 6–1).
Centralised integrated plant
Products to
market
Figure 6–1: Scenario 1: Centralised integrated plant
· Scenario 2: This scenario consists of two separate business units not located at the same
premises. First, a centralised rearing facility that focuses exclusively on closing the life cycle to
continuously produce 5-DOL for use at different treatment facilities. Then, individual treatment
facilities located at different locations throughout the city, ideally close to the source of waste
generation. These decentralised treatment facilities process organic waste using the 5-DOL
from the rearing facility to obtain grown larvae and also convert these grown larvae into BSFL
products such as fresh larvae, dried larvae and/or larvae meal and oil (Figure 6–2)
Centralised nursery
Decentralised waste treatment and post-processing
5-DOL
Products to
market
Figure 6–2: Scenario 2: Centralised nursery, decentralised treatment and post-processing
· Scenario 3: This scenario is similar to scenario 2 with decentralised treatment facilities. In this
case however the treatment facilities also obtain 5-DOL to conduct waste treatment but then
do not process the grown larvae into products but instead sell the fresh grown larvae back to
the central facility. This central facility therefore does not only rear 5-DOL for the treatment
facilities but also receives grown larvae from them to convert these larvae into BSFL products
such as fresh larvae, dried larvae and/or larvae meal and oil (Figure 6–3).
88 Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing5-DOL
Decentralised waste treatment
3
Centralised nursery and post-processing
Products to
market
Figure 6–3: Scenario 3: Centralised nursery and post-processing, decentralised treatment
As described in the scenarios 2 and 3, these models require a supply chain and an exchange of
crucial goods between the centralised and decentralised facilities. For both scenarios 2 and 3 the
regular supply of 5-DOL is vital. This is a source of income for the rearing facility and is a raw ma-
terial for the treatment facility besides the waste they receive. For scenarios 3, the exchange of
goods goes in both directions. 5-DOL are transferred from the rearing/post-processing facility to
the treatment facility and then grown larvae are transferred back from the treatment facility back
to the rearing/post-processing facility. In this exchange, it is important to find a pricing scheme
for these products that is beneficial for all parties. If the rearing facility charges too high prices
for their 5-DOL, then the decentralised treatment facility might run into a deficit and go out of
business. Similarly, if the decentralised treatment facility charges a too high price for the grown
larvae, then nursery/post-processing facility may go out of business.
The scenario-based business model tool helps identify pricing schemes for such product exchang-
es while also considering the scale of operation of each facility given the impact of economies of
scale.
Furthermore, the tool gives insights into the cost structure of each processing unit and provides
financial performance indicators as well as key capital budgeting indicators such as net present
value (NPV), payback period (PB) and internal rate of return (IRR) based on a period of 5 years with
a discount rate of 11%.
The scenario-based business model tool is an excel based tool.
Each scenario has its own excel file where the user can fill in
the required data. All the excel models as well as a manual can
be downloaded for free through this link.
Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing 896.3
The web-based cost model tool
The web-based cost model is a more simplified version of the “scenario-based business model
tool”. It assumes a central plant with all units integrated in one facility. It estimates operational
cost to provide the user with the production cost per unit of BSF product (i.e. costs incurred from
manufacturing a BSF product). This can then be compared with current sales prices of similar
competing products on the market. The user selects a scale of operation based on the amount
of waste that shall be treated, what BSF products shall be sold, and enters some additional unit
costs given the local context (labour costs, utility costs, etc.). Default conversion values based on
the experience from Indonesia are provided, but these can be individually adjusted by the user if
other information is available. The benefit of using this web-based cost model tool is that you do
not need to be a BSF expert. It is enough to be a BSF enthusiast that wants to explore what it
means to operate a BSF facility, how much product and what production cost you might expect.
The tool output is shown as a flowchart including mass flows through the different processing
units besides the costs.
The web-based cost model is an online tool which focusses
on calculating the operational cost per unit of a selected BSF
product.
6.4
Siting a BSF waste processing facility
Understanding the natural life-cycle is the basis for setting up an efficient and reliable BSF waste
processing facility. At the facility, with its infrastructure, equipment and workers with their skill
sets, the operator takes control over the natural life cycle of BSF to thus, create and operate an
engineered biosystem.
The facility location with its components and activities strives to best mimic the natural habitat
and the needs of the BSF, while steering them towards increased efficiency and stability so that
a continuous waste treatment can be ensured. The following aspects should be taken into consid-
eration when selecting an appropriate site for a BSF processing facility:
· Nearby sources of good quality biowaste in regular and/or predictable amounts. The closer the
facility is to the waste, the lesser is the need for transport and logistics of waste sourcing.
· Nearby customers for larvae and their conversion products. The closer the distance to your
customers the easier it is to maintain suitable market channels and enhance customer relation-
ships while also reducing transport costs.
· Appropriate location in the city or neighbourhood that does not incur conflicts with or obstruc-
tion by residents or adjacent land users.
· Adequate green zones that can buffer the facility from the surrounding area (e.g. open areas,
trees, fences, etc.)
· Availability of water, a wastewater system and connection to a power grid
· Adequate building infrastructure and quality. The treatment area should have a roof and a con-
crete base to provide shelter and provide a clean workspace. An office, toilet facilities and lab
space should also be available.
When the location has been selected and construction plans are being developed the following
specific aspects need to be considered:
90 Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing· The site should be protected from infestation of pests and vermin. Ant traps are required for
·
·
·
·
·
6.5
contact points between the equipment and the floor. Ensure that there is no contact between
equipment and the walls. Mesh wire protection may be required for all essential components
of the rearing operation to avoid birds, rats and lizards from accessing the larvae.
Treatment units need to be placed away from direct sunlight, maintained at temperatures of
around 25 degrees and without impact of rain and ideally kept at low humidity.
Rearing stages of egg, pre-pupae and pupae need high humidity and temperatures of around
28 degrees with full shading from the sun.
Rearing stage of the larvae need to kept at a low humidity, temperatures of around 25 degrees
and with full shading from the sun.
Rearing of the fly and mating stages need high humidity a temperature of around 28 degrees
and abundance of indirect sunlight.
Post-processing unit needs to have sufficient ventilation, comfortable temperature for manual
labour and very low humidity levels.
Creating a floorplan and planning the unit locations for a BSF site
One of the outputs of both cost model tools, as described above, is the space requirements for
each of the three units (rearing, conversion/treatment and post-processing) at a BSF facility de-
pending of the scale of waste input. Figure 6–4 shows an example of a floorplan for the selected
facility of 5 tons of biowaste per day.
Employee
facilities
Storage
Office
Waste pre-
processing
Laboratory
Waste treatment
Post-
processing
678 m 2
Rearing unit
Harvesting
121 m 2
105 m 2
Figure 6–4: Floorplan for BSF biowaste processing plant with a capacity of 5 tons biowaste input per day
When comparing different scales (see Table 6–1) and the respective space requirements at
these scales, it becomes clear that this does not increase or decrease linearly with the increase
or decrease in waste input. Especially the rearing unit shows the least dependency between
scale and space requirement. Here the equipment, for instance the racks, come with a fixed
Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing 91scale of design. In that sense smaller scale does not affect space requirements but indicates that
the equipment is not used at full capacity. In contrast, the waste treatment unit shows a strong
dependency between scale and space. This is the result of a small unit size of equipment. For every
small change of scale the total number of these small pieces of equipment increases immediately
requiring more space to accommodate. Lastly, the post-processing unit, show a similar pattern as
the rearing unit. The capacity of most installed equipment is often not the limiting factor and there-
fore a decrease or even increase of scale can be accommodated with the same piece of equip-
ment. This is shown in Table 6–1 when comparing scale of 1 ton and 2 tons of waste processed per
day. Although the scale has doubled there is almost no effect on the floorspace required.
Table 6–1: Overview of site scale and effect on size of the different operational units
Amount of waste
processed per day
Area Rearing
Area Conversion
Area Processing
Total Area
5 ton/d 121 m 2 678 m 2 105 m 2 ±900 m 2
2 ton/d 71 m 2 286 m 2 47 m 2 ±400 m 2
1 ton/d 47 m 2 160 m 2 44 m 2 ±250 m 2
6.6
Operational scenarios and work scheduling
The operational guidance as provided in this book is based on a BSF treatment facility that has the
capacity to produce enough 5-DOL to treat around 35 tons of biowaste per week. This requires a
daily presence and work schedule, seven days a week.
Depending on waste, space and labour availability, one could however also choose a reduced
work schedule that can be managed working only half of the days in a week or even less with an
alternate Monday-Wednesday-Friday work schedule (see Table 6–3).
Table 6–2: Capacity of the described BSF facility depending on work schedule
Work schedule
Waste
capacity
Output of
5-DOL
workers
required
Area
Daily 5-DOL output
fluctuation
1 Every day 35 ton / wk ±50 million / wk 23 900 m 2 Stable
2 Every other day 14 ton / wk ±20 million / wk 12 400 m 2 Small fluctuation
3 Mon-Wed-Fri 7 ton / wk ±8 million / wk 9 250 m 2 Large fluctuation
The work schedules and log sheets presented in the annexes are developed for an every day work
schedule. This setup has shown to be the most stable in the production of young larvae and is the
most reliable for converting a daily continuous flow of biowaste arriving at the site. For all three
work schedules, different task lists and feeding schedules have been designed and are available
for download.
92 Black Soldier Fly Biowaste ProcessingBesides the “every day” work schedule as provided in the
Annex, this link provides access to two different operational
scenarios with respective work schedules. The manual ex-
plains the impact of these different work scenarios and how to
prepare these schedules.
The work schedules use a date code
format: XX.Y. This allows for easy date
calculations and tagging of cages and
containers. The XX-value indicates the
calendar week of the year (week 01-52/53).
The Y-value indicates the day of the
week (Monday-Sunday = 1-7).
Date:
Code:
Tuesday, February 21
8.2
Week 8 of the year
Day 2 of the week
Work schedules are only available for the rearing (Annex A) and conversion (Annex C) units, as the
post-processing unit uses “Standard Operating Procedures” (SOP) files related to the operational
steps at each operational station. In the work schedules, a short explanation is provided for each
task and the columns to the right are left white when the task has to be performed on that day or
shaded black when this task does not need to be performed. Work schedules should be placed
clearly visible and accessible somewhere close to where the staff is working so that the personnel
following the checklist can check off each task when completed. Each work schedule covers a
period of four weeks which is then replaced with new schedules by the facility manager for the
next period.
The rearing unit requires one additional schedule for the feeding of the nursery larveros (Annex
B). In the nursery larveros, 5-DOL are fed about 2-3 weeks until they transform into pre-pupae.
The pre-pupae are then put into pupation containers to eventually become flies. Nursery larveros
are fed a nutrient rich feed. The harvesting of pre-pupae relies on crawl-off. Towards the end of
the feeding phase, the water content of the feed is increased, which allows pre-pupae to increase
traction to then be able to crawl out of the nursery container. The feeding schedule for the nursery
container informs the operator which feed mixture has to be applied to which nursery container.
Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing 93Date
Set-up
1 KG 2 KG
2 KG
2 KG
2 KG 2 KG 2 KG
1 KG
1 KG Dism.
8.1 8.1 7.6 7.5 7.3 7.2 6.7 6.6 6.5 6.3 6.1 5.5
8.2 8.2 7.7 7.6 7.4 7.3 7.1 6.7 6.6 6.4 6.2 5.6
8.3 8.3 8.1 7.7 7.5 7.4 7.2 7.1 6.7 6.5 6.3 5.7
Indicate the IDs of the
nursery containers to be
fed today
Today’s code
Number and colour
indicate the amount and
type of feed to be fed
ID of the nursery
container to be
dismantled today
The left white column indicates the current date. The second column indicates the date code for
the nursery larvero that will be set-up on that day. The other cells along the row indicate the ID of
the nursery larveros to be fed at the date as shown in column 1. The colour indicates the amount
and type of feed they receive. The feed differs in terms of the amount of water added to the chick-
en feed (CF) and ranges from 70 - 100% water.
1kg / 30% CF / 70% H 2 O
2kg / 30% CF / 70% H 2 O
2kg / 15% CF / 85% H 2 O
1kg / 100% H 2 O
The table presented in the Annex is meant to serve as a template for an Excel-sheet; an operator
can easily update a schedule in Excel according to formulas.
Annexes D, E, F, and G present the respected log sheets which were prepared as a template for a
recording file to enter all the data that will be collected on each day of operation. All the monitoring
data to assess productivity of the unit can be entered on this sheet.
94 Black Soldier Fly Biowaste ProcessingBlack Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing 9596 Black Soldier Fly Biowaste ProcessingAnnexes
Overview of available schedules and log sheet templates.
Annex A Work schedule for rearing unit in the
every day-full capacity setting
Annex B Feeding schedule nursery larvero for
every day-full capacity setting
Annex C Work schedule for conversion unit in the
every day-full capacity setting
Annex D Log sheet for daily data input of productivity
parameters in BSF rearing unit
E Log sheet for daily data input of
productivity parameters in treatment step
of BSFL conversion unit
Annex F Log sheet for daily data input of productivity
parameters in pre-processing and harvesting
stage BSFL conversion unit
Annex G Log sheet for daily data input of productivity
parameters in BSFL post-processing unit
Annex
Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing 9798 Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing
5
ABlack Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing 99
7
Time
min100 Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing
7
Time
minB
Feeding schedule for the nursery larveros in the every day setting. “xx” marks the calendar
week. The “+1” indicates the following week, the “-1” indicated the previous week and “-2” the
week before that, etc. The colours are related to an amount of feed in a certain ratio of chicken
feed (CF) to water.
Annex B:
Date Set-up
xx.1 xx.1
2 KG 2 KG 2 KG 2 KG 2 KG 2 KG 1 KG 1 KG Dism.
xx-1.5 xx-1.3 xx-1.2 xx-2.7 xx-2.6 xx-2.5 xx-2.3 xx-2.1 xx-3.5
xx.2 xx.2 xx-1.6 xx-1.4 xx-1.3 xx-1.1 xx-2.7 xx-2.6 xx-2.4 xx-2.2 xx-3.6
xx.3 xx.3 xx-1.7 xx-1.5 xx-1.4 xx-1.2 xx-1.1 xx-2.7 xx-2.5 xx-2.3 xx-3.7
xx.4 xx.4 xx.1 xx-1.6 xx-1.5 xx-1.3 xx-1.2 xx-1.1 xx-2.6 xx-2.4 xx-2.1
xx.5 xx.5 xx.2 xx-1.7 xx-1.6 xx-1.4 xx-1.3 xx-1.2 xx-2.7 xx-2.5 xx-2.2
xx.6 xx-1.1 xx-2.6 xx-2.3
xx-1.2 xx-2.7 xx-2.4
xx+1.1 This xx.3
is how the xx.1
feeding schedule
nursery larveros
xx.6
xx-1.7 for the xx-1.5
xx-1.4 is built xx-1.3
up: Every day, you set up a new nursery larvero and feed the
xx.7
xx.4 larvero xx.2
xx-1.6
xx-1.5
xx-1.4
nursery
whose date xx.1
codes can be
found in the
same row
with
the
corresponding
amount
and
type
of
feed
xx+1.1
xx.5
xx.3
xx.2
xx-1.7
xx-1.6
xx-1.5 xx-1.3 xx-1.1 xx-2.5
xx+1.2 xx+1.2 xx.6 xx.4 xx.3 xx.1 xx-1.7 xx-1.6 xx-1.4 xx-1.2 xx-2.6
etc. etc. etc. etc. etc. etc. etc. etc. etc. etc. etc.
etc. etc. etc. etc. etc. etc. etc. etc. etc. etc. etc.
Date Set-up 6.1 6.1 5.5 5.3 5.2 4.7 4.6 4.5 4.3 4.1 3.5
6.2 6.2 5.6 5.4 5.3 5.1 4.7 4.6 4.4 4.2 3.6
6.3 6.3 5.7 5.5 5.4 5.2 5.1 4.7 4.5 4.3 3.7
xx.7
2 KG
2 KG
2 KG
2 KG
2 KG
2 KG
1 KG
1 KG
Dism.
6.4 6.4 6.1 5.6 5.5 5.3 5.2 5.1 4.6 4.4 4.1
6.5 6.5 6.2 5.7 5.6 5.4 5.3 5.2 4.7 4.5 4.2
6.6 6.6 6.3 6.1 5.7 5.5 5.4 5.3 5.1 4.6 4.3
6.7 6.7 6.4 6.2 6.1 5.6 5.5 5.4 5.2 4.7 4.4
7.1 7.1 6.5 6.3 6.2 5.7 5.6 5.5 5.3 5.1 4.5
7.2 7.2 6.6 6.4 6.3 6.1 5.7 5.6 5.4 5.2 4.6
7.3 7.3 6.7 6.5 6.4 6.2 6.1 5.7 5.5 5.3 4.7
7.4 7.4 7.1 6.6 6.5 6.3 6.2 6.1 5.6 5.4 5.1
7.5 7.5 7.2 6.7 6.6 6.4 6.3 6.2 5.7 5.5 5.2
7.6 7.6 7.3 7.1 6.7 6.5 6.4 6.3 6.1 5.6 5.3
5.7 5.4
7.7 7.7 7.4 7.2 7.1 6.6 6.5 6.4 6.2 8.1 8.1 7.5 7.3 7.2 6.7 6.6 6.5 8.2 8.2 7.6 7.4 7.3 7.1 6.7 6.6 8.3 8.3 7.7 7.5 7.4 7.2 7.1 6.7 8.4 8.4 8.1 7.6 7.5 7.3 7.2 7.1 6.3
6.1
5.5
This is how the sheet
will be hanging
6.4
6.2 on the 5.6
wall of your colony.
6.5
6.3
5.7
This example starts on
Monday of week
6.6
6.4 6
6.1
8.5 8.5 8.2 7.7 7.6 7.4 7.3 7.2 6.7 6.5 6.2
8.6 8.6 8.3 8.1 7.7 7.5 7.4 7.3 7.1 6.6 6.3
8.7 8.7 8.4 8.2 8.1 7.6 7.5 7.4 7.2 6.7 6.4
9.1 9.1 8.5 8.3 8.2 7.7 7.6 7.5 7.3 7.1 6.5
9.2 9.2 8.6 8.4 8.3 8.1 7.7 7.6 7.4 7.2 6.6
9.3 9.3 8.7 8.5 8.4 8.2 8.1 7.7 7.5 7.3 6.7
9.4 9.4 9.1 8.6 8.5 8.3 8.2 8.1 7.6 7.4 7.1
9.5 9.5 9.2 8.7 8.6 8.4 8.3 8.2 7.7 7.5 7.2
9.6 9.6 9.3 9.1 8.7 8.5 8.4 8.3 8.1 7.6 7.3
9.7 9.7 9.4 9.2 9.1 8.6 8.5 8.4 8.2 7.7 7.4
30% CF 15% CF 0% CF
30% CF
Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing 101102 Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing
5
CBlack Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing 103
7
Time
min104 Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing
7
Time
minBlack Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing 105
7
Time
minD
log sheet for daily data input of productivity parameters
in BSF rearing unit
Annex D:
Name responsible
Date code
Egg Data
Date code of today
Mass harvested eggs (g)
Data love cage
12.2
Date code of love cage
11.7
managed
67.3
73.5
–
11.5
Commets
Weight of egg mass from
the specific love cage
5-DOL Data
Date nursery box
# 5-DOL in 2 grams
11.4
971
953
Average (#)
Mass 5-DOL (g)
962
1,558
# of 5-DOL
750,000
Total mass x Average / 2
Prepupal Data
Date nursery larvero
10.6
Mass pre-pupae (g)
Date nursery larvero
Mass pre-pupae (g)
113
Keeps track of the
number of prepupae
harvested from the
nursery containers
10.4 145
10.2 67
9.7 105
Mass 100 PP (samples
from all PP) 2x
1:
Weight of random sample
of 200 prepupae taken
from today’s pooled nursery
container harvest
26.3 g
2:
25.5 g
Average:
25.9 g
Prepupae in pupation box
# of boxes
Date of dark cage for
pupation container
12.4
PP added per box today (g)
16
500
1500
Future date code of the dark
cage that will be set up with
these pupation containers
Love cage filling
Setting
Empty
ID of dark cage
Mass of love cage
IDs of dark cages to
which the love cage
Comments
is connected
to
914
106 Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing
1 st setting
9.3
921
2 nd setting 3 rd setting
10.3
1,144 11.3
1,634
Weight of empty
love cage (including
hanger)
Total PP (g)
4 th setting
Cumulated prepupae per
pupation container. See
yesterday’s log sheet for
previous number
5 th setting
mass 20 flies
1.68 g
Cumulated weight love cage
after every connection to a
dark cage (including hanger)D
Annex D:
Master copy of log sheet for BSF rearing unit
Name responsible
Date code
Egg Data
Mass harvested eggs (g)
Data love cage
Comments
5-DOL Data
Date nursery box
# 5-DOL in 2 grams
Average (#)
Mass 5-DOL (g)
# of 5-DOL
Prepupal Data
Date nursery larvero Mass pre-pupae (g) Date nursery larvero Mass pre-pupae (g)
Mass 100 PP (sample
from all PP) 2x 1: 2: Average:
PP added per box today (g) Total PP (g)
Prepupae in pupation box
Date of dark cage for
pupation container
# of boxes
Love cage filling
Setting
Empty
1 st setting
2 nd setting
3 rd setting
4 th setting
5 th setting
mass 20 flies
ID of dark cage
Mass of love cage
Comments
Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing 107108 Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing
residue
pallet
EBlack Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing 109
EF
log sheet for daily data input in pre-processing and
harvesting stage of BSFL conversion unit
Annex F:
Name responsible
Date code
Waste sorting and pre-processing
Types of substrate and
waste fractions
Received (kg)
Waste source
To processing (kg)
Type:
Note down origin of
different biowaste
streams arriving at
the site
Note down the different
types of substrates going
into the BSF treatment
(e.g. fruits, restaurant
waste, bakery products,
...)
Type:
Type:
Type:
Type:
Composting
Inorganics Recycling
Pallet harvesting
Pallet code:
Pallet code:
Pallet code:
Weight (kg)
Weight (kg)
Weight (kg)
Crate 1 + 2 + 3 Crate 1 + 2 + 3 Crate 1 + 2 + 3
Crate 4 + 5 + 6 Crate 4 + 5 + 6 Crate 4 + 5 + 6
Crate 7 + 8 + 9 Crate 7 + 8 + 9 Crate 7 + 8 + 9
Crate 10 + 11 + 12 Crate 10 + 11 + 12 Crate 10 + 11 + 12
Crate 13 + 14 + 15 Crate 13 + 14 + 15 Crate 13 + 14 + 15
Crate 16 + 17 + 18 Crate 16 + 17 + 18 Crate 16 + 17 + 18
Crate 19 + 20 + 21 Crate 19 + 20 + 21 Crate 19 + 20 + 21
Crate 22 + 23 + 24 Crate 22 + 23 + 24 Crate 22 + 23 + 24
Crate 25 + 26 + 27 Crate 25 + 26 + 27 Crate 25 + 26 + 27
Crate 28 + 29 + 30 Crate 28 + 29 + 30 Crate 28 + 29 + 30
Crate 31 + 32 + 33 Crate 31 + 32 + 33 Crate 31 + 32 + 33
Crate 34 + 35 + 36 Crate 34 + 35 + 36 Crate 34 + 35 + 36
Total weight (kg) Total weight (kg) Total weight (kg)
Larvae Larvae Larvae
Manually
separated residue
Manually
Weight of all larvae
separated residue
from the pallet after
Residue mechanical separation
(calculated)
Results after subtraction of larval
weight and manually sorted
material from total weight
Manually
separated residue
Residue
(calculated) Residue
(calculated)
Weight of manually
separated residue
Sampling for substrate in, residue out and larvae
Pallet code: DATE + Pallet CODE:
Type 50g
Subtrate
Tray 1
20 in pallet 50g
Fill
code
BSFL on schedule
Subtrate
based
from Annex E
50g
Residue
DATE + Pallet CODE:
20
BSFL
50g
Subtrate
Fill in exact mass of
samples with ±50g
of substrate, ±50g
of residue and 20
counted BSFL
Wet+T1
Dry+T1
Tray 2
Wet+T2
Dry+T2
Tray 3
Wet+T3
Dry+T3
50g
Residue
DATE + Pallet CODE:
Fill in weight of empty
tray, then tray + wet
material and then after
drying the tray + dry
material
110 Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing
50g
Residue
20
BSFLF
Master copy of log sheet for pre-processing and harvesting
stage of BSFL conversion unit
Annex F:
Name responsible
Date code
Waste sorting and pre-processing
Types of substrate and
waste fractions
Received (kg)
Waste source
To processing (kg)
Type:
Type:
Type:
Type:
Type:
Composting
Inorganics Recycling
Pallet harvesting
Pallet code:
Pallet code:
Pallet code:
Weight (kg)
Weight (kg)
Weight (kg)
Crate 1 + 2 + 3 Crate 1 + 2 + 3 Crate 1 + 2 + 3
Crate 4 + 5 + 6 Crate 4 + 5 + 6 Crate 4 + 5 + 6
Crate 7 + 8 + 9 Crate 7 + 8 + 9 Crate 7 + 8 + 9
Crate 10 + 11 + 12 Crate 10 + 11 + 12 Crate 10 + 11 + 12
Crate 13 + 14 + 15 Crate 13 + 14 + 15 Crate 13 + 14 + 15
Crate 16 + 17 + 18 Crate 16 + 17 + 18 Crate 16 + 17 + 18
Crate 19 + 20 + 21 Crate 19 + 20 + 21 Crate 19 + 20 + 21
Crate 22 + 23 + 24 Crate 22 + 23 + 24 Crate 22 + 23 + 24
Crate 25 + 26 + 27 Crate 25 + 26 + 27 Crate 25 + 26 + 27
Crate 28 + 29 + 30 Crate 28 + 29 + 30 Crate 28 + 29 + 30
Crate 31 + 32 + 33 Crate 31 + 32 + 33 Crate 31 + 32 + 33
Crate 34 + 35 + 36 Crate 34 + 35 + 36 Crate 34 + 35 + 36
Total weight (kg) Total weight (kg) Total weight (kg)
Larvae Larvae Larvae
Manually
separated residue Manually
separated residue Manually
separated residue
Residue
(calculated) Residue
(calculated) Residue
(calculated)
Sampling for substrate in, residue out and larvae
Pallet code: DATE + Pallet CODE:
Type 50g
Subtrate
50g
Residue
DATE + Pallet CODE:
20
BSFL
50g
Subtrate
50g
Residue
DATE + Pallet CODE:
20
BSFL
50g
Subtrate
50g
Residue
20
BSFL
Tray 1
Wet+T1
Dry+T1
Tray 2
Wet+T2
Dry+T2
Tray 3
Wet+T3
Dry+T3
Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing 111G
log sheet for daily data input of parameters in BSFL
post-processing unit
Annex G:
Name responsible
Date code
Today’s operator
Date code of today
Drying method
Drying equipment used
Drum dryer (roasting)
Drying data
Mass IN (kg)
5
5
5
5
Amount of larvae
added to dryer
Total IN (kg)
20
At the end of the day,
summarise total mass IN
Mass OUT (kg)
1.5
1.5
1.5
1.5
Drying time (minutes)
Amount of larvae
removed from dryer
35
35
35
35
Comments
Time larvae spent
in the dryer
TOTAL OUT (kg)
4.6
At the end of the day,
summarise total mass OUT
Larvae data for fractioning
Production date code Comments
19.2 Roasted larvae
Production date code
of dried larvae
Type of dried
larvae
Fractioning
Larvae IN (kg)
20
Total amount of
larvae added to the
screw press
Press cake OUT (kg)
14
Crude oil OUT (hours)
4
Total amount of
press cake and BSF
crude oil obtained
Cake grinding
Dry press cake IN (kg) Meal OUT (kg)
14 14
Comments
Amount of meal
collected
Oil refining
Crude oil IN (kg) Oil OUT (kg)
4 2.5
112 Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing
Comments
Amount of oil
collected
CommentsG
Annex G:
log sheet for daily data input of parameters in BSFL
post-processing unit
Name responsible
Date code
Drying method
Drying equipment used
Drying data
Mass IN (kg) Mass OUT (kg)
Total IN (kg) TOTAL OUT (kg)
Drying time (minutes)
Comments
Larvae data for fractioning
Production date code
Comments
Fractioning
Larvae IN (kg)
Press cake OUT (kg)
Crude oil OUT (hours)
Comments
Cake grinding
Dry press cake IN (kg)
Meal OUT (kg) Comments
Oil OUT (kg) Comments
Oil refining
Crude oil IN (kg)
Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing 113H
Annex H:
Technical drawings of custom-made materials used in the BSF
biowaste processing plant
Ventilation frame for stacking larveros units
114 Black Soldier Fly Biowaste ProcessingFrame for stacking incubator units
Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing 115H
Annex H:
Frame for stacking pupation crates
116 Black Soldier Fly Biowaste ProcessingFrame for stacking nursery larveros
Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing 117H
Annex H:
Hatchling shower frame
118 Black Soldier Fly Biowaste ProcessingMobile love cage transfer frame
Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing 119H
Annex H:
Love cage table frame
120 Black Soldier Fly Biowaste ProcessingDark cage table frame
Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing 121H
Annex H:
Love Cage
Dark Cage
122 Black Soldier Fly Biowaste ProcessingBlack Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing 123I
Annex I:
Item name
Overview of equipment required for a BSF biowaste processing
plant with a capacity of 5 ton/d
Dimensions Units
required
Capacity / unit
BSF rearing unit
Pupation crates
Pupation frame
Dark cage
Dark cage frame
Cement mixer
Love cage
Egg media
Fly harvester
Love cage frame
Hatchling crate
Hatching shower frame
Egg holder
Nursery Larvero
Collection container
Nursery larvero frame
Bulk storage bins
Working table
Bulk scale
Bulk balance
Precision balance
Washing machine 60 × 40 × 12
243 × 48.5 × 61
140 × 140 × 70
145 × 75 × 190
Max 350 kg
140 × 70 × 70
25 × 5 × 3
290 × 73 × 85
289 × 240 × 70
60 × 40 × 12
165 × 94.5 × 61
D4.5
55x35 × 14
60 × 40 × 12
155 × 48.5 × 61
80 L
180 × 70 × 60
Max 150 kg
Max 35 kg
Max 2 kg
Max 5 kg 186
5
8
8
1
29
290
1
10
63
4
40
75
75
12
6
1
1
2
4
1 7,500
16
16
1
512
8,000
10
12
3
665,000
10
10
10,000
1
6
5,000,000
6
10,000,000
4,000,000
2,000,000
16
BSFL conversion unit
Incubator units
Incubator holding crate
Incubator frame
Larvero units
Pallet
Ventilation frames
Pallet trolley
Shredder
Shaking sieve
High pressure cleaner
Bulk scale 30 × 20 × 10
60 × 40 × 15
155 × 141 × 61
60 × 40 × 15
129 × 122 × 15
129 × 122 × 12
Max 2 ton
1 ton/hour
1 ton/hour
-
Max 150 kg 3,875
969
39
3,875
108
540
2
1
1
2
3 1
4
18
11
36
5
2,520
8,000
3,150
2,520
2,000
Prepupae/crate
Crates/frame
Crates/cage
Cage/frame
Crates/day/mixer
Flies/cage
Media/cage
Dark cages/harvester
Cages/frame
5-DOL/crate
Crates/frame
Holders/frame
Larvae/Larvero
Container/Larvero
Larvero+container/frame
5-DOL/triple set of bins
Larvero frames/table
5-DOL/scale
5-DOL/balance
5-DOL/balance
cages/washing machine
kg waste/crate
Incubator units/crate
Holding crates/frame
kg waste/crate
Crates/pallet
Frames per pallet
kg waste/trolley
kg waste/shredder/day
kg residue/sieve/day
kg waste/unit/day
kg waste/unit/day
BSFL post-processing unit (only capacity provided, because quantity depends on product choice)
Sanitising set
Custom made
120
kg fresh larvae / day
Kitchen microwave
32 L
8
kg fresh larvae / day
Industrial microwave
Max-30B
210
kg fresh larvae / day
Wok pan for sand roasting
Custom made
24
kg fresh larvae / day
Drum dryer for roasting
Custom made
60
kg fresh larvae / day
Oven
Custom made
30
kg fresh larvae / day
Screw press
DL-ZYJ10B
40
kg dried larvae / day
Industrial screw press
ZX80
160
kg dried larvae / day
Grinder
AGR-GRP-180
480
kg press cake / day
124 Black Soldier Fly Biowaste ProcessingBlack Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing 125Eawag
Überlandstrasse 133
8600 Dübendorf
Switzerland
Phone +41 (0)58 756 52 86
www.eawag.ch
www.sandec.ch
This book deals with urban organic municipal waste from households, commercial activities, and
institutions. It describes the approach of biowaste conversion by insect larvae, using the example
of the Black Soldier Fly (BSF), Hermetia illucens.
This engineered biosystem consists of feeding segregated biowaste to BSF larvae, which are
reared in a nursery. Larvae grow on the waste feedstock and reduce its biomass. At the end of the
process, larvae are harvested and, if necessary, post-processed to a suitable animal feed product.
This guide is for practical use, explaining the required materials and equipment, as well as each
working step similar to a cookbook with its respective recipes and materials required. It includes
all information necessary to develop and operate a BSF waste processing facility, able to treat five
tons of waste per day. This second edition of 2021 builds on the first version published in 2017. It
includes our more recent experiences and describes developments and our updated suggestions.
In particular, this second edition has new chapters on larvae post-processing and marketing of
larvae products, on cost-analysis of BSF operations and respective facilities, and on information on
site design and options of business models for BSF waste processing.
This second edition has benefited significantly from two projects. FORWARD is a R&D project
located in Indonesia funded by the Swiss State Secretariat for Economic Affairs (SECO), under a
framework agreement with the Indonesian Ministry of Public Works & Housing (PU-PeRa). It works
in close collaboration with national and local governmental authorities, with Indonesian researchers
and with selected private enterprises to advance and mainstream implementation of BSF waste
processing. SIBRE is a research project funded by SwissRe Foundation with the objective to gen-
erate knowledge and tools around BSF waste processing for use by small & medium enterprises
and municipalities. Its focus was set predominantly on the economic perspectives and developing
standard protocols for products derived from BSF larvae and testing these in the Indonesia context.