4.2.3 Harvesting
After the larvae have fed on the substrate and only dry residue remains, the Larvero units are
harvested using a mechanical sieving system which allows for the mixture of residue and larvae
to be separated into three fractions. The larvae can then be removed and further processed. The
residue streams undergo further treatment before being applied to soils.
 Materials and equipment needed:
Conveyor (custom made) and separation system (Guan-Yu, GY-1000-2S). Sieve with dimensions of
100 x 100 x 106 cm, 2HP dynamo with voltage of 380 (3-phase) and 1440 rpm
Dry matter analysis cupDry matter/TS oven
Spade Trolley
Bulk scale
(max 150 kg, acc 50 g)
52 Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing
 Tasks:
Step 1: Prepare the harvesting area by placing empty material bins under the outlets of the sieving machine and placing the bulk balance near the hopper of the conveyor belt.
Step 1: Harvesting station with sieving system, collection bins and residue bags
Step 4: Weighing crates from the biowaste conversion
unit on a scale
Step 2: Select the pallet or pallets that will be harvested on this day, by checking the set-up/harvesting
schedule, and move it/them to the harvesting area using the pallet trolley
Step 3: Turn on the bulk balance, conveyor belt and sieving machine
Step 4: Take three empty conversion crates and tare their weight on the bulk balance. Then take the first
three larvero units with a mixture of residue and larvae from the pallet and place them on the bulk
balance. Note down the mass in the log sheet.
Step 5: Empty the three larvero units one-by-one into the hopper so that the material gradually is transported into the top of the sieve by the conveyor.
Step 6: Repeat the processes of weighing, noting down the weight and emptying the units until one pallet
is harvested. Then repeat the process for the other pallets that are scheduled to be harvested
today
Step 7: While harvesting the pallets: ensure you keep each of the three output fractions separate for each
pallet to obtain harvesting yield per pallet. Switch bins with empty ones when full.
Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing 53
Step 7: Larvae and residue on transport belt before being
separated into the different fractions
PROTECTIVE MEASURES FOR WORKERS:
· Use gloves, eye protection and protective clothing during harvesting activities.
Step 8: One output fraction will have larger particles,
the content of this bin is weighed and noted
down and the material is composted. Another
output stream is the fine residue, the content
of this bin is weighed and noted down and the
material is bagged for maturing.
Step 9: The third fraction are the larvae which are still
mixed with some residue with a particle size
similar to the size of the larvae. The residue is
removed by skimming it off (by hand) from the
top of the bin as larvae are pushing up the residue to get away from the light. After no clusters
of residue can be observed, the bin with larvae
can be weighed and the weight noted down. 
Once you take out all the larvae, put the residue into a sampling tray. Take 20 of the larvae and
dry them with a tissue before putting them onto a sampling tray. Repeat this three times for the
three samples. Put the rest of the larvae back to the harvested crates or directly on the harvesting
screen. Weigh the samples (larvae and residue) and dry them in an oven at 105 °C for 24 hours
before weighing each tray again. By doing this, you will obtain the water content of the larvae and
the residue. Calculate the water content of the sample by: Water content [%] = (Wet weight-Dry
weight)/Wet weight*100