4.2.1 Pre-processing
The goal of the pre-processing step is to reduce particle size and homogenise the input material.
The waste can then easily be distributed and fed to the larvae and the nutrients are made easily
accessible to the larvae and the associated bacteria.
 Materials and equipment needed:
Hammer-mill shredder
(Cap 1 ton/h)
Dry matter analysis cupDry matter/TS oven
Bin
(80 L)
Bulk scale
(max 150 kg, acc 50 g)
Mixer
(max cap 300 kg)
 Tasks:
Step 1: After a quality check and acceptance,
remove the organic waste from the
collection vehicle and place the waste
near the shredder. While emptying
the vehicle, remove non-organics contained in the waste (rough sorting).
Step 2 : Place a labelled bucket under the shredder outlet and turn on the shredder.
Step 3: While filling the hopper to shred the
waste, manually remove non-organic
components in the waste. When the
waste receiving bucket is full, exchange
it with a labelled empty new bucket.
Step 4: Weigh and document each full bucket
of shredded waste using a bulk scale.
Step 1: Removing baskets with waste from the market.
Baskets are checked one by one on content
Step 5: After all waste is shredded, use the high-pressure washer to clean the inside, outside and around
the shredder. All the wastewater needs to be discharged for treatment.
Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing 47
Step 6: If the waste substrate is still too moist (water content >80%) a dry bulk material has to be added
to balance the water content and allow for the residue to be dry by the end of the process. You can
mix the materials in with the substrate before feeding it into the conversion units using a mixer or
simply add the dry material to the crates first and then add the wet substrate on top.
Step 7: If the substrate is too dry (water content <70), you can mix it in with a wet substrate or simply add
water. Ensure that the dry material is always on the bottom and the wet material on top in case
the material is not mixed before adding it into the larvero units.
Step 8: To find out what the water content of a waste material is, a Total Solids (TS) sample has to be
prepared in a specifically designed oven. Normally these ovens are called ‘’dry matter ovens’’ or
‘’TS ovens’’.