Chapter 6:

Business development
A business model for your BSF facility should be in place before starting your venture especially if
the intention is to run it as a business. This chapter provides some tools to support your business
model with numbers and to help identify what preconditions must be met before opening a BSF
facility.

6.1

Cost-revenue analysis and financial viability
Understanding and assessing the cost of BSF waste processing is an important aspect before
starting or while operating a BSF facility. This involves not only estimating the capital costs required for construction but also appraising the expected operational costs for a specific local
context and monitoring cost units during operations. Here we present two tools to help with
cost-revenue assessments and allow judgement on the financial viability of a BSF biowaste processing facility.
The “scenario based business model tool” is for those that want to look at a BSF facility in detail.
It dissects each processing unit individually in terms of capital and operational cost. It provides
material lists required but also allows for individual adjustments if the user has experience and is
familiar with the specific local conditions at the location of interest. Analysis of each processing
unit separately allows to appraise different business models, for instance different degrees of decentralization and management of supply chains. After choosing a desired scenario, and entering
other input variables, the tool then calculates key financial parameters such as Net Present Value
(NPV), to determine the value of such a potential investment project.
Another tool is the “web-based cost model tool”, that provides a much more simple overview of
the costs involved in developing a BSF facility, based on the amount and type of waste conceived.
The tool utilizes data from the existing site and design in Indonesia, and provides default processing conversions values, to calculate costs of capital expenditure and cost of production per unit.
The user then can assess the local market and potential sales prices of BSF products to judge if
a profit margin is possible.
Assessing potential revenue flows derived from BSF waste processing and comparing these to
cost items of a BSF facility, depending on scale of operation, gives a good indication if financial
viability might be achieved. Although experience and data from existing facilities can give a good
indication of space, equipment and labour requirements there are nevertheless variables that will
affect this data which depend very much on the local specific context and conditions:
· CAPEX or capital costs of the facility (e.g. local cost for constructing custom-made materials,
local availability of equipment, etc.
· OPEX or operational cost of the facility (e.g. local utilities cost, local labour wages, etc.)
· Climate and other environmental impacts (e.g. temperature, humidity, odour prevention, waste
water management, etc.)
· Potential revenues from waste processing (gate fees)
· Potential sales revenue from larvae derived products (e.g. whole larvae, dried BSFL, BSF meal
and BSF oil)
· Sales revenue from BSF rearing products such as 5-DOL sold for the use of converting waste
at other locations
· Sales of the waste residue as soil amendment or sales of related products such as biogas from
treating residue.

Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing 87

6.2

The scenario-based business model tool
The scenario-based business model tool was developed to differentiate each processing unit of
the facility based on “Activity Based Costing”. This allows the user to compare different scenarios
of business models and implementation. Three distinct scenarios are made available in the tool
which are described by the following figures below:

· Scenario 1: This scenario assumes one full-fledged centralised plant which includes all processing units at one location. This central BSF facility, receives organic waste, processes this
waste with BSF to obtain grown larvae and then converts (post-processing) these larvae into
BSFL products such as fresh larvae, dried larvae and/or larvae meal and oil. This same facility
also runs a rearing unit that closes the lifecycle to ensure pupae, flies and eggs and continuously provides 5-DOL for the treatment unit (Figure 6–1).

Scenario 1

Centralised integrated plant

Products to
market

Figure 6–1: Scenario 1: Centralised integrated plant

· Scenario 2: This scenario consists of two separate business units not located at the same
premises. First, a centralised rearing facility that focuses exclusively on closing the life cycle to
continuously produce 5-DOL for use at different treatment facilities. Then, individual treatment
facilities located at different locations throughout the city, ideally close to the source of waste
generation. These decentralised treatment facilities process organic waste using the 5-DOL
from the rearing facility to obtain grown larvae and also convert these grown larvae into BSFL
products such as fresh larvae, dried larvae and/or larvae meal and oil (Figure 6–2)

Centralised nursery

Decentralised waste treatment and post-processing

Scenario 2

5-DOL
Products to
market

Figure 6–2: Scenario 2: Centralised nursery, decentralised treatment and post-processing

· Scenario 3: This scenario is similar to scenario 2 with decentralised treatment facilities. In this
case however the treatment facilities also obtain 5-DOL to conduct waste treatment but then
do not process the grown larvae into products but instead sell the fresh grown larvae back to
the central facility. This central facility therefore does not only rear 5-DOL for the treatment
facilities but also receives grown larvae from them to convert these larvae into BSFL products
such as fresh larvae, dried larvae and/or larvae meal and oil (Figure 6–3).

88 Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing

5-DOL

Decentralised waste treatment

Scenario 3

Centralised nursery and post-processing

Products to
market

Figure 6–3: Scenario 3: Centralised nursery and post-processing, decentralised treatment

As described in the scenarios 2 and 3, these models require a supply chain and an exchange of
crucial goods between the centralised and decentralised facilities. For both scenarios 2 and 3 the
regular supply of 5-DOL is vital. This is a source of income for the rearing facility and is a raw material for the treatment facility besides the waste they receive. For scenarios 3, the exchange of
goods goes in both directions. 5-DOL are transferred from the rearing/post-processing facility to
the treatment facility and then grown larvae are transferred back from the treatment facility back
to the rearing/post-processing facility. In this exchange, it is important to find a pricing scheme
for these products that is beneficial for all parties. If the rearing facility charges too high prices
for their 5-DOL, then the decentralised treatment facility might run into a deficit and go out of
business. Similarly, if the decentralised treatment facility charges a too high price for the grown
larvae, then nursery/post-processing facility may go out of business.
The scenario-based business model tool helps identify pricing schemes for such product exchanges while also considering the scale of operation of each facility given the impact of economies of
scale.
Furthermore, the tool gives insights into the cost structure of each processing unit and provides
financial performance indicators as well as key capital budgeting indicators such as net present
value (NPV), payback period (PB) and internal rate of return (IRR) based on a period of 5 years with
a discount rate of 11%.

The scenario-based business model tool is an excel based tool.
Each scenario has its own excel file where the user can fill in
the required data. All the excel models as well as a manual can
be downloaded for free through this link.

Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing 89

6.3

The web-based cost model tool
The web-based cost model is a more simplified version of the “scenario-based business model
tool”. It assumes a central plant with all units integrated in one facility. It estimates operational
cost to provide the user with the production cost per unit of BSF product (i.e. costs incurred from
manufacturing a BSF product). This can then be compared with current sales prices of similar
competing products on the market. The user selects a scale of operation based on the amount
of waste that shall be treated, what BSF products shall be sold, and enters some additional unit
costs given the local context (labour costs, utility costs, etc.). Default conversion values based on
the experience from Indonesia are provided, but these can be individually adjusted by the user if
other information is available. The benefit of using this web-based cost model tool is that you do
not need to be a BSF expert. It is enough to be a BSF enthusiast that wants to explore what it
means to operate a BSF facility, how much product and what production cost you might expect.
The tool output is shown as a flowchart including mass flows through the different processing
units besides the costs.

The web-based cost model is an online tool which focusses
on calculating the operational cost per unit of a selected BSF
product.

6.4

Siting a BSF waste processing facility
Understanding the natural life-cycle is the basis for setting up an efficient and reliable BSF waste
processing facility. At the facility, with its infrastructure, equipment and workers with their skill
sets, the operator takes control over the natural life cycle of BSF to thus, create and operate an
engineered biosystem.
The facility location with its components and activities strives to best mimic the natural habitat
and the needs of the BSF, while steering them towards increased efficiency and stability so that
a continuous waste treatment can be ensured. The following aspects should be taken into consideration when selecting an appropriate site for a BSF processing facility:
· Nearby sources of good quality biowaste in regular and/or predictable amounts. The closer the
facility is to the waste, the lesser is the need for transport and logistics of waste sourcing.
· Nearby customers for larvae and their conversion products. The closer the distance to your
customers the easier it is to maintain suitable market channels and enhance customer relationships while also reducing transport costs.
· Appropriate location in the city or neighbourhood that does not incur conflicts with or obstruction by residents or adjacent land users.
· Adequate green zones that can buffer the facility from the surrounding area (e.g. open areas,
trees, fences, etc.)
· Availability of water, a wastewater system and connection to a power grid
· Adequate building infrastructure and quality. The treatment area should have a roof and a concrete base to provide shelter and provide a clean workspace. An office, toilet facilities and lab
space should also be available.
When the location has been selected and construction plans are being developed the following
specific aspects need to be considered:

90 Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing

· The site should be protected from infestation of pests and vermin. Ant traps are required for

·
·
·
·
·

6.5

contact points between the equipment and the floor. Ensure that there is no contact between
equipment and the walls. Mesh wire protection may be required for all essential components
of the rearing operation to avoid birds, rats and lizards from accessing the larvae.
Treatment units need to be placed away from direct sunlight, maintained at temperatures of
around 25 degrees and without impact of rain and ideally kept at low humidity.
Rearing stages of egg, pre-pupae and pupae need high humidity and temperatures of around
28 degrees with full shading from the sun.
Rearing stage of the larvae need to kept at a low humidity, temperatures of around 25 degrees
and with full shading from the sun.
Rearing of the fly and mating stages need high humidity a temperature of around 28 degrees
and abundance of indirect sunlight.
Post-processing unit needs to have sufficient ventilation, comfortable temperature for manual
labour and very low humidity levels.

Creating a floorplan and planning the unit locations for a BSF site
One of the outputs of both cost model tools, as described above, is the space requirements for
each of the three units (rearing, conversion/treatment and post-processing) at a BSF facility depending of the scale of waste input. Figure 6–4 shows an example of a floorplan for the selected
facility of 5 tons of biowaste per day.

Employee
facilities

Storage

Office

Waste preprocessing

Laboratory

Waste treatment
Postprocessing

678 m2
Rearing unit
Harvesting
121 m2

105 m2

Figure 6–4: Floorplan for BSF biowaste processing plant with a capacity of 5 tons biowaste input per day

When comparing different scales (see Table 6–1) and the respective space requirements at
these scales, it becomes clear that this does not increase or decrease linearly with the increase
or decrease in waste input. Especially the rearing unit shows the least dependency between
scale and space requirement. Here the equipment, for instance the racks, come with a fixed

Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing 91

scale of design. In that sense smaller scale does not affect space requirements but indicates that
the equipment is not used at full capacity. In contrast, the waste treatment unit shows a strong
dependency between scale and space. This is the result of a small unit size of equipment. For every
small change of scale the total number of these small pieces of equipment increases immediately
requiring more space to accommodate. Lastly, the post-processing unit, show a similar pattern as
the rearing unit. The capacity of most installed equipment is often not the limiting factor and therefore a decrease or even increase of scale can be accommodated with the same piece of equipment. This is shown in Table 6–1 when comparing scale of 1 ton and 2 tons of waste processed per
day. Although the scale has doubled there is almost no effect on the floorspace required.

Table 6–1: Overview of site scale and effect on size of the different operational units

Amount of waste
processed per day

Area Rearing

Area Conversion

Area Processing

Total Area

5 ton/d

121 m2

678 m2

105 m2

±900 m2

2 ton/d

71 m2

286 m2

47 m2

±400 m2

1 ton/d

47 m2

160 m2

44 m2

±250 m2

6.6

Operational scenarios and work scheduling
The operational guidance as provided in this book is based on a BSF treatment facility that has the
capacity to produce enough 5-DOL to treat around 35 tons of biowaste per week. This requires a
daily presence and work schedule, seven days a week.
Depending on waste, space and labour availability, one could however also choose a reduced
work schedule that can be managed working only half of the days in a week or even less with an
alternate Monday-Wednesday-Friday work schedule (see Table 6–3).

Table 6–2: Capacity of the described BSF facility depending on work schedule

Work schedule

Waste
capacity

Output of
5-DOL

workers
required

Area

Daily 5-DOL output
fluctuation

1

Every day

35 ton / wk

±50 million / wk

23

900 m2

Stable

2

Every other day

14 ton / wk

±20 million / wk

12

400 m

2

Small fluctuation

3

Mon-Wed-Fri

7 ton / wk

±8 million / wk

9

250 m

2

Large fluctuation

The work schedules and log sheets presented in the annexes are developed for an every day work
schedule. This setup has shown to be the most stable in the production of young larvae and is the
most reliable for converting a daily continuous flow of biowaste arriving at the site. For all three
work schedules, different task lists and feeding schedules have been designed and are available
for download.

92 Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing

Besides the “every day” work schedule as provided in the
Annex, this link provides access to two different operational
scenarios with respective work schedules. The manual explains the impact of these different work scenarios and how to
prepare these schedules.

The work schedules use a date code
format: XX.Y. This allows for easy date
calculations and tagging of cages and
containers. The XX-value indicates the
calendar week of the year (week 01-52/53).
The Y-value indicates the day of the
week (Monday-Sunday = 1-7).

Date:

Code:

Tuesday, February 21

8.2

Week 8 of the year
Day 2 of the week

Work schedules are only available for the rearing (Annex A) and conversion (Annex C) units, as the
post-processing unit uses “Standard Operating Procedures” (SOP) files related to the operational
steps at each operational station. In the work schedules, a short explanation is provided for each
task and the columns to the right are left white when the task has to be performed on that day or
shaded black when this task does not need to be performed. Work schedules should be placed
clearly visible and accessible somewhere close to where the staff is working so that the personnel
following the checklist can check off each task when completed. Each work schedule covers a
period of four weeks which is then replaced with new schedules by the facility manager for the
next period.
The rearing unit requires one additional schedule for the feeding of the nursery larveros (Annex
B). In the nursery larveros, 5-DOL are fed about 2-3 weeks until they transform into pre-pupae.
The pre-pupae are then put into pupation containers to eventually become flies. Nursery larveros
are fed a nutrient rich feed. The harvesting of pre-pupae relies on crawl-off. Towards the end of
the feeding phase, the water content of the feed is increased, which allows pre-pupae to increase
traction to then be able to crawl out of the nursery container. The feeding schedule for the nursery
container informs the operator which feed mixture has to be applied to which nursery container.

Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing 93

Date

Set-up

1 KG

2 KG

2 KG

2 KG

2 KG

2 KG

2 KG

1 KG

1 KG

Dism.

8.1

8.1

7.6

7.5

7.3

7.2

6.7

6.6

6.5

6.3

6.1

5.5

8.2

8.2

7.7

7.6

7.4

7.3

7.1

6.7

6.6

6.4

6.2

5.6

8.3

8.3

8.1

7.7

7.5

7.4

7.2

7.1

6.7

6.5

6.3

5.7

Indicate the IDs of the
nursery containers to be
fed today

Today’s code

Number and colour
indicate the amount and
type of feed to be fed

ID of the nursery
container to be
dismantled today

The left white column indicates the current date. The second column indicates the date code for
the nursery larvero that will be set-up on that day. The other cells along the row indicate the ID of
the nursery larveros to be fed at the date as shown in column 1. The colour indicates the amount
and type of feed they receive. The feed differs in terms of the amount of water added to the chicken feed (CF) and ranges from 70 - 100% water.

1kg / 30% CF / 70% H 2 O

2kg / 30% CF / 70% H 2 O

2kg / 15% CF / 85% H 2 O

1kg / 100% H 2 O

The table presented in the Annex is meant to serve as a template for an Excel-sheet; an operator
can easily update a schedule in Excel according to formulas.
Annexes D, E, F, and G present the respected log sheets which were prepared as a template for a
recording file to enter all the data that will be collected on each day of operation. All the monitoring
data to assess productivity of the unit can be entered on this sheet.

94 Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing

Black Soldier Fly Biowaste Processing 95

